In the mid-1800s, educator and Spiritist researcher Allan Kardec published a book called Heaven and Hell. In it, he documented dozens of conversations with spirits of the dead, communicated through mediums during Spiritist seances. He participated in many of the conversations himself. These accounts ranged from suffering souls and repentant criminals to ordinary people. One of the most severe testimonies in the book was the case of Jacques Latour, a convicted murderer executed in 1864. He believed his execution by guillotine would end everything. But in this account, his spirit appears unexpectedly at a private meeting in Brussels and says execution was nothing compared to what followed. What emerges is a grim testimony about remorse, memory, prayer, and the claim that death did not end his awareness.

This testimony begins with an unsettling detail. No one had called Jacques Latour. No one present was even thinking about him. Yet a woman medium suddenly began writing with violent force, forming his name in huge letters. When the medium asked why he had come, Latour answered that he had sensed compassion in the room. Others, he said, had approached him with curiosity or horror. This gathering felt different. The written account says his despair was so intense that it visibly affected the medium's face, voice, and gestures. According to the interview, he explained his arrival this way:

"I saw that you were compassionate, and that you would pity me.", "Others have called me more out of curiosity than charity... or they shrink back from me in horror.", "Oh yes... pity! You do not know how much I need pity."

Latour's first major claim is direct and unforgettable. The guillotine, he says, was brief. The real punishment began afterward. He describes his post-death state as constant suffering, without pause, without rest, and without any sense of final escape. In his account, death did not erase consciousness. It exposed him to something far more terrible than the physical punishment he had once feared. He then described his suffering in words that are hard to forget:

"The guillotine! What is that compared with what I endure now?", "The guillotine was nothing... only a moment.", "What I endure now is a constant death.", "It is suffering with no pause and no rest... and no end!"

Latour says his punishment was not abstract. He describes it as relentless confrontation with the people he killed. Their wounds, their faces, their pleading, and even the blood tied to his crimes remained before him. He says he could not escape any of it. In this interview, punishment is described not as theatrical fire, but as inescapable moral vision. The spirit described it this way:

"And my victims are there... all around me.", "They show me their wounds.", "They follow me with their eyes.", "And I cannot escape them!", "This pool of blood... and this gold covered with blood!", "I walk through blood."

As the communication continues, Latour moves from terror into confession. He admits he killed for gold. He remembers refusing pity to those who begged for their lives. He says he denied God deliberately because he wanted to believe death would end all consequences. In this part of the interview, his suffering becomes inseparable from the full moral recognition of what he had done. Here are some of his own words:

"I thought that after death everything would be over.", "I defied God.", "I denied that there was a God.", "I had no pity on my victims. In my cowardly wickedness, I killed them for their gold.", "My God! I am a horrible criminal! I understand that now."

Those present told Latour that God asks for sincere repentance and the desire to repair the evil one has done. They promised to pray for him, and according to the account, the effect was immediate. Latour says the terrible images began to withdraw. When he returned the next day, he said the suffering had not ended, but the prayers had already helped him. The punishment remained. What changed was his strength under it. After the group prayed for him, he answered like this:

"Do not reject me as I rejected others.", "Pray for me.", "You have had pity on me. Those horrible images are going away.", "Thank you for your prayers. I am already better because of your prayers.", "My victims will soon come back. That is my punishment."

Latour eventually says he wants his testimony to become a lesson. Sermons, he argues, often fail to move hardened criminals. They fear the police more than religious threats. But he believes a direct testimony from someone who expected death to end everything, only to discover the opposite, could stop people before they commit terrible acts. In his own view, this is how his punishment may begin to serve reparation. He said his experience should stand as a warning:

"If people could know what lies beyond life on Earth...", "There would be no more murderers, no more criminals, no more evil men!", "I will begin repairing my faults by giving warnings.", "Sermons about hellfire do little to affect hardened criminals.", "They are less afraid of devils than of policemen.", "What I thought was the end of my troubles was only the beginning of torments impossible to describe."

One of the interview's most important passages comes when Latour reflects on what punishment actually is. He rejects the idea that a spirit suffers from literal material fire. What he describes instead is moral torture after death. He says the prayers offered for him do not cancel the pain, but they strengthen him, and because he is stronger, the same suffering weighs less heavily. From there he reaches a simple spiritual conclusion: to pray is to love, and to love is to pray. Later in the interview, he explained it this way:

"Moral torture after death is very different.", "Although my pain is the same, I am stronger, and my pain seems less severe.", "Now I understand the power of prayer.", "To pray is to love.", "To love is to pray."

The tone of the interview changes dramatically near the end. Latour says he has been freed from the constant sight of his victims. He speaks of gratitude, forgiveness, and the desire to return one day as a messenger of peace and charity. A guiding spirit then explains that Latour will eventually be sent among those like his former accomplices to awaken remorse in them. In his final message, Latour adds something else: he says that if he had been rightly guided in life, much evil might have been prevented. He describes prison, exclusion, contempt, and hunger as forces that can drive a fallen person back into crime. He does not excuse himself. But he asks to be remembered, not as the man he had been, but as a suffering soul beginning to hope. His later words, followed by the guide's explanation, move from torment toward repentance and repair:

"I am forgiven.", "Infinite mercy has freed me from the sight of my victims.", "I am still a suffering spirit, but I am also a repentant one.", "If I had been rightly guided in life, I would not have done all the evil I did.", "Think of me as a poor suffering soul beginning to hope."

The guiding spirit added: "He will be sent among those who were his accomplices."

In his last reflections, Latour says that poor moral guidance, prison corruption, and social rejection can push a fallen person deeper into evil. He says a man may leave prison wanting to reform, only to find every honest door closed against him. Hunger and contempt can then drive him back toward crime. These lines do not excuse his murders. But they widen the testimony, turning it into a warning not only about personal guilt, but also about the way society helps create its own tragedies.

"If I had been rightly guided in life, I would not have done all the evil I did.", "What people call justice is badly administered.", "Every door is closed to him.", "Hunger drives him back into crime.", "Think of me as a poor suffering soul beginning to hope."

Jacques Latour's testimony is one of the harshest interviews in Heaven and Hell. It begins in terror, moves through confession and prayer, and ends in the first signs of repair. Whether one reads it as spiritual evidence, moral literature, or historical warning, its central claim is the same: evil does not end with the act, and death does not erase accountability. Yet the interview insists on something else as well. Even after grave wrongdoing, repentance, prayer, and the long work of reparation can still open a path toward hope.

To read the full interview and explore other after-death experiences in multiple languages, visit life death beyond book dot com.
