JOSEPH BRÊ 
Died in 1840; evoked at Bordeaux, in 1862, by his granddaughter. Uprightness in the sight of God, and uprightness according to the judgment of men. 1. Dear grandfather, will you tell me how you are situated in the spirit-world, and give me such details concerning your present life as may be useful for our advancement? 
A. Most willingly, my dear child. I am expiating my want of faith; but the mercy of God is great, and makes allowance for circumstances. I suffer; not as you understand suffering, but from regret that I did not make a better use of my time upon the Earth. 
2. How can you say that you did not make a good use of it? You always lived the life of an upright man. 
A. Yes, as men judge of uprightness; but there is an abyss between what passes for uprightness among men, and the uprightness that is approved as such by God. I will try, for your instruction, to make you understand the difference between them. 
Among you, a man is looked upon as upright if he respects the laws of his country (although this respect is, with many, extremely elastic), and if he abstains from robbing his neighbor of his property, although he may rob him of his honor, of his happiness, provided the vile hypocrite does so in ways that escape the action of the law and of public opinion. Once the long list of praises and apparent virtues are engraved on the flat stone, they believe that they have paid their debt to humanity. What a mistake! To be upright in the sight of Heaven, it is not enough to have abstained from transgressing the laws of men; it is necessary, above all, not to have transgressed the laws of God! 
The upright man in the sight of God is he who, filled with devotion and charity, spends his life in doing good, in helping forward the progress of his fellow-creatures; he who, being animated with a zeal that is kindled by the foresight of the end to be obtained, is perpetually active in all the business of life; active in fulfilling the duties imposed upon him by his worldly position, for he should inculcate the love of labor among his brother; active in every good work, for he must not forget that he is a servant of whom the Master will by-and-by demand an account of the way in which he has spent his life, inculcating by his example the love of God and of the neighbor. He who would be upright in the sight of God must carefully avoid cutting remarks, the insidious suggestions, which destroy reputations and ruin positions, by dishonoring their victims or by making them objects of ridicule. The heart of the man who would be judged upright by God must be free from the least taint of pride, envy, and ambition. He must be patient and gentle with those who attack him; he must forgive, from the bottom of his heart, without effort and without ostentation, all those who have wronged him; he must love the Creator in all His creatures; he must, in short, put in practice the summary of human duties – so concise and yet so complete! – “Thou shalt love God above all things and thy neighbor as thyself.” 
Such, dear granddaughter, is an imperfect outline of what constitutes uprightness in the sight of God. I ask you; candidly, did I fulfill all these conditions? No, I was very far from doing so; I confess the fact without hesitation. I was not active in all good works, as I ought to have been; my forgetfulness of God led me into other sorts of forgetfulness which, though not punishable by human laws, are nonetheless offences against the law of God. I suffered much when I came to perceive this fact; and therefore I am able now to hope, with the consoling hope that is born of faith in the mercy of God, who sees my repentance. Tell this to others, my dear child; repeat it to all those whose conscience is burdened. Let them atone for past remissness by doing good to the very utmost of their power; and the Divine pity will accept their expiations and wipe out the memory of their faults. 