CHARLES DE SAINT-G—— (Spiritist Society of Paris, 1860) 
Charles de Saint-G—— was a mentally disabled thirteen year old child. His intellectual nullity was such that he did not even know his parents and could hardly take his food. In his case, the development of the bodily organism seemed to have been entirely arrested. 
1. (To Saint Louis.) – Q. Will you have the kindness to tell us whether we can evoke the spirit of the idiot-boy of whom we are thinking? 
A. You can evoke him as though you were evoking the spirit of one deceased. 2. Your answer would lead us to suppose that we could evoke him at any moment? A. Yes; his soul is held to his body by physical links, but not by spiritual links; it can therefore disengage itself from the body at any time. 
3. (Evocation of Charles de Saint-G——.) – A. I am an unhappy spirit bound to the Earth, like a bird tied by the leg. 
4. In your present place, are you, as a spirit, conscious of your nullity as a human being? A. Certainly, I clearly feel my captivity. 5. While your body is asleep and your spirit is disengaged from it, are your thoughts as lucid as though you were in a normal state? 
A. When my wretched body is asleep, I am somewhat freer to raise my thought towards the Heaven to which I aspire. 
6. Does your physical state cause you, as a spirit, any painful feeling? A. Yes, for it is a punishment. 7. Do you remember your preceding existence? A. Oh yes, it is the cause of my present exile. 8. What were you in that existence? A. A young libertine, in the reign of Henri III. 9. You say that your present condition is a punishment; it was then, chosen by you? A. No. 10. How can your present existence be useful to your advancement in the state of nullity in which you are? 
A. My state is not a nullity in the sight of God who imposed it upon me. 11. Do you foresee the end of your present life? A. No; I only know that sooner or later, I shall return to my native country. 12. What were you doing as a spirit, between your previous incarnation and your present life? 
A. It was on account of my frivolity, as a spirit, that I was sentenced by God to my present imprisonment. 
13. In your daily life, are you aware of what goes on around you, notwithstanding the imperfection of your organs? 
A. I see, I hear; but my body neither understands nor sees anything. 14. Can we do anything that would be of use to you? A. Nothing. (To Saint Louis) – Q. Are prayers of the same use to a reincarnated spirit as to a discarnate one? 
242 
A. Prayers are always agreeable to God; they could not be of any immediate use to this unhappy spirit in his present state; but they will be taken note of and will be useful to him by and by. 
This evocation confirms the statements so often made by our spirit-friends about mentally disabled people. Their mental nullity does not result from any nullity of their spirit, who, apart from his bodily organs, is in possession of all his faculties. A defective organization is only an obstacle to the free manifestation of those faculties; it does not annihilate them. A mentally disabled person is like a strong man bound. 
