Background: On February 12, at a Spiritist meeting in Le Havre, a spirit spoke on his own. He was later identified as Francois Simon Louvet, an old laborer who, in poverty and drunken despair, had thrown himself from the Tower of Francis the First on July 22, 1857. He was sixty-seven years old.

Narration: The medium’s hand begins writing...

Francois Simon Louvet: Have pity on a poor miserable man who has been suffering such terrible torment for so long.

Francois Simon Louvet: Oh...

Francois Simon Louvet: Emptiness...

Francois Simon Louvet: Space...

Francois Simon Louvet: I am falling!

Francois Simon Louvet: I am falling!

Francois Simon Louvet: Help me!

Francois Simon Louvet: My God...

Francois Simon Louvet: My life was so miserable.

Francois Simon Louvet: I was very poor.

Francois Simon Louvet: In my old age, I was so often hungry.

Francois Simon Louvet: That is why I took to drinking.

Francois Simon Louvet: And so I grew ashamed and disgusted with my life.

Francois Simon Louvet: I wanted to die.

Francois Simon Louvet: And I threw myself down.

Francois Simon Louvet: Oh, my God...

Francois Simon Louvet: What a moment that was.

Francois Simon Louvet: Why couldn't I have waited a little longer, when I was already so near the end of my days?

Francois Simon Louvet: Pray for me.

Francois Simon Louvet: Pray that I won't always have this dreadful emptiness under me.

Francois Simon Louvet: I am going to be dashed to pieces on the stones.

Francois Simon Louvet: I beg you...

Francois Simon Louvet: Help me.

Francois Simon Louvet: You who know the horrors suffered by those who are no longer on Earth...

Francois Simon Louvet: I speak to you even though you do not know me.

Francois Simon Louvet: Because I suffer so much.

Francois Simon Louvet: Why ask me for proofs?

Francois Simon Louvet: I am miserable.

Francois Simon Louvet: Is that not enough?

Francois Simon Louvet: If I were hungry, instead of having to bear this horrible misery, so much more terrible because you cannot see it...

Francois Simon Louvet: You wouldn't hesitate to relieve me by giving me a piece of bread.

Francois Simon Louvet: I ask you to pray for me.

Francois Simon Louvet: I cannot stay any longer.

Francois Simon Louvet: Ask the happy spirits who are here.

Francois Simon Louvet: They will tell you who I was.

Francois Simon Louvet: Pray for me.

Mediums’ Guide: The one who has just spoken to you, my child, is a poor miserable man who had to go through the trial of poverty on Earth.

Mediums’ Guide: But he became disgusted with life.

Mediums’ Guide: His courage failed.

Mediums’ Guide: And instead of looking upward as he should have, he gave himself over to drunkenness.

Mediums’ Guide: When he had sunk into the deepest despair, he put an end to his badly borne trial by throwing himself from the Tower of Francis the First on July 22, 1857.

Mediums’ Guide: Take pity on his unhappy soul.

Mediums’ Guide: It has advanced only a little.

Mediums’ Guide: But it has gained enough knowledge of the future life to suffer and to desire a new trial.

Mediums’ Guide: Pray to God that this favor may be granted to him.

Mediums’ Guide: And you will do a good deed.

Background: Research later confirmed the details. Kardec notes that six years after death, this spirit still felt himself falling from the tower and being crushed on the stones. He was terrified by the emptiness under him and by the impact still awaiting him. The account is meant to show that such punishments were described by the spirits themselves, not invented by human imagination.
