Background: Mr. Felicien was rich, well educated, a noted poet, kind, courteous, and honorable. After being ruined by unlucky financial speculation at an age when he felt too old to start over, he gave way to discouragement and hanged himself in his bedroom in December 1864. He was neither a materialist nor an atheist, but he had given little thought to the future life. Four months later, out of personal sympathy, people who had known him called his spirit.

Narration: The medium’s hand begins writing...

Mr. Felicien: I regret the Earth.

Mr. Felicien: I had many disappointments there.

Mr. Felicien: But fewer than I have here.

Mr. Felicien: The world of spirits contains a very mixed company.

Mr. Felicien: It would take a great deal of sorting out to make it bearable.

Mr. Felicien: I am in constant amazement.

Mr. Felicien: What scenes of spirit life could be drawn from this place.

Mr. Felicien: Balzac should take up the work.

Mr. Felicien: It would be difficult even for him.

Mr. Felicien: But I have not seen him.

Mr. Felicien: Where are those clever minds that so strongly whipped the vices of the human race?

Mr. Felicien: They ought to stay here, as I am doing, before going any higher.

Mr. Felicien: It is a curious chaos.

Mr. Felicien: And watching it amuses me, so I stay here.

Background: His way of speaking sounded so much like his old character that the group recognized him, but the fact that he didn't mention how he died caused a moment of doubt.

Medium: Can you tell us what you died of?

Mr. Felicien: What did I die of?

Mr. Felicien: From the kind of death I had chosen.

Mr. Felicien: I had spent a long time thinking about how I would get rid of life.

Mr. Felicien: I confess I have not gained much by it.

Mr. Felicien: I freed myself from Earth's worries only to find myself tormented by others in this life that are far more serious and painful.

Mr. Felicien: And I cannot see their end.

Medium: Is it really Mr. Felicien who is replying?

Medium: This careless way of speaking seems strange in one who committed suicide.

Mediums’ Guide: Yes.

Mediums’ Guide: But from a feeling that is understandable in his condition, he did not want to reveal how he died.

Mediums’ Guide: That is why he talked on lightly at first.

Mediums’ Guide: Pressed by your question, he finally admitted it.

Mediums’ Guide: But he is deeply troubled at having to do so.

Mediums’ Guide: He suffers terribly for his regrettable folly.

Mediums’ Guide: And he avoids, as much as he can, whatever would remind him of it.

Medium: We were all the more grieved by your death because we foresaw the sad consequences it would bring.

Medium: And for my part, I have not forgotten how kind and obliging you always were to me.

Medium: I would be very glad if I could help you.

Mr. Felicien: And yet I saw no other way to escape the troubles of my financial situation.

Mr. Felicien: Now I need your prayers.

Mr. Felicien: Pray especially that I may be freed from the horrible companions around me.

Mr. Felicien: They persecute me with their laughter, their cries, and their hellish jeers.

Mr. Felicien: They call me a coward.

Mr. Felicien: And they are right.

Mr. Felicien: It is cowardice to leave life on Earth.

Mr. Felicien: This makes four times I've failed under the same trial.

Mr. Felicien: And yet I had promised myself so firmly that I would not fail again.

Mr. Felicien: What weakness.

Mr. Felicien: Ah, pray for me.

Mr. Felicien: What tortures I am going through.

Mr. Felicien: How miserable I am.

Mr. Felicien: You will do more for me by praying than I did for you while I was on Earth.

Mr. Felicien: But the trial I've failed so often stands before me as something I can't escape.

Mr. Felicien: After some time, I must go through it again.

Mr. Felicien: Will I have the strength to bear it to the end?

Mr. Felicien: Ah...

Mr. Felicien: How sad it is to have to begin life on Earth so many times.

Mr. Felicien: To struggle for so long, and still be pulled by events into new failures, in spite of your resolutions.

Mr. Felicien: It drives one to despair.

Mr. Felicien: That is why I need strength.

Mr. Felicien: They say prayer gives strength.

Mr. Felicien: Pray for me.

Mr. Felicien: I too will pray.

Background: Kardec says this ordinary-looking case of suicide shows an important point: the same temptation can come back again and again in successive lives until the spirit grows strong enough to resist it.

Narration: The medium’s hand begins writing...

Medium: Think carefully about what I am going to say.

Medium: What you call fate is nothing more than your own weakness.

Medium: There is no such thing as blind fate forcing a person to do wrong.

Medium: Human beings are always free.

Medium: And that freedom is their noblest gift.

Medium: God did not make man a machine, acting and obeying under some outside force.

Medium: This freedom makes a person capable of falling.

Medium: But it also makes him capable of getting better.

Medium: And it is only by becoming better that he reaches the highest happiness.

Medium: Pride leads people to blame destiny for their troubles on Earth.

Medium: Yet in general, they have only their own carelessness to blame.

Medium: In your last existence, you were a striking example of this.

Medium: You had everything the world calls good fortune.

Medium: You had intelligence, talent, wealth, and general esteem.

Medium: You had no destructive vices.

Medium: On the contrary, you had many excellent qualities.

Medium: How then was your earthly position so seriously damaged?

Medium: Simply through lack of foresight.

Medium: If you had acted more prudently, if you had been satisfied with the fine share of wealth you already had instead of trying to add to it unnecessarily, you would not have been ruined.

Medium: There was no fate in your case.

Medium: You could have avoided the misfortunes you brought upon yourself.

Medium: Your trial was a chain of circumstances meant to present you, not with compulsion, but with the temptation of suicide.

Medium: Sadly, in spite of your intelligence and education, you did not rise above those circumstances.

Medium: And now you must pay the price of your weakness.

Medium: This trial, as you correctly foresee, will be renewed.

Medium: In your next existence, events will again stir up thoughts of suicide in your mind.

Medium: And it will continue to be so until you conquer the temptation.

Medium: Instead of blaming fate, recognize the goodness of God.

Medium: Rather than condemning you forever for your failings, He gives you new chances to improve and begin again.

Medium: Your suffering will not be endless.

Medium: It will last only as long as you keep giving in to the temptation you're meant to overcome.

Medium: It now depends on you to prepare yourself through sincere repentance, firm resolutions, and prayer for the help of higher spirits.

Medium: Then, when you return to Earth, you will be stronger against temptation.

Medium: Once you overcome this weakness, your progress will move quickly, because in many other ways you are already morally advanced.

Medium: Only one victory still remains for you.

Medium: We will help you with our prayers.

Medium: But those prayers will remain powerless unless you support them by your own efforts.

Mr. Felicien: Thanks.

Mr. Felicien: Thanks for your wise advice.

Mr. Felicien: I need it greatly.

Mr. Felicien: I am unhappier than I was willing to let show.

Mr. Felicien: I promise you I will profit from it.

Mr. Felicien: I will prepare myself so thoroughly for my next incarnation that I won't fail again.

Mr. Felicien: For I long to escape the low company that's tormenting me now.
