CONCLUSION

I

Those who know only magnetism by the little magnetized
toy ducks that are made to swim around in a basin of water would
find it difficult to understand that this little amusement contains
the secret of the mechanism of the universe and of the movement
of worlds. The same applies to those who only know Spiritism by
the entertainment of table-turning.61 They see it as no more than
an amusement, a pastime at social gatherings, and they do not
understand how such a simple and common phenomenon, known
to antiquity and even to semi­-primitive cultures, could be connected
in any way with the most serious problems of the social order. In fact,
to the superficial observer, what connection could a turning table
have with the morality and future of humankind? And yet, whoever
would take the time to reflect will remember that from a simple
pot whose lid is lifted by steam – an event that has also occurred
since antiquity  – emerged the powerful steam engine we use in
order to cross space and go great distances. So, likewise, all of you
who do not believe in anything beyond the material world should
know that from the table turning that elicits your disdainful smiles

61 In Kardec’s time, the phenomenon of table-turning was a pastime at social gatherings
comparable to the Ouija Board sessions that occur nowadays. – Tr.

Conclusion

an entire science has emerged, as well as the solutions to problems
that no philosophy has ever been able to solve. I appeal to all sincere
adversaries and ask them to state whether they have done the work
of studying what they criticize, because criticism is only valuable
when the critic understands the subject. By ridiculing something
that we know nothing about, something that we have not probed
with the scalpel of the conscientious observer, we are not criticizing
but instead are proving our shallowness and poor judgment ability.
Of course, if we had presented this philosophy as being the work of
the human mind, it would have encountered less disdain and would
have merited the honor of being examined by those who think they
guide public opinion. But it has come from the Spirits! How absurd!
It hardly deserves a glance. They judge it merely by its label, like
the monkey in the fable, who judged the nut by its shell. If you
wish, set aside this book’s origin and imagine that it is the work of
a human individual. After having read it seriously, ask your soul and
conscience whether you have found material deserving of mockery.

II

Spiritism is the most dreaded antagonist of materialism; thus,
it is not surprising that materialists are its adversaries. However, since
materialism is a doctrine that is barely accepted by its own proponents
(further proof that they do not regard themselves sufficiently strong
and that they have not completely taken leave of their conscience),
they cover themselves with the mantle of reason and science. And
what is even more bizarre is that the most skeptical go so far as to talk
in the name of religion, which they also do not know or understand
any better than Spiritism. Their target is particularly the extraordinary
and the supernatural – they reject both. Their argument is that since
Spiritism is founded on the extraordinary, it can be nothing more than
foolish speculation. They do not seem to realize that by rejecting the

Conclusion

extraordinary and the supernatural, they also reject religion, which
is founded on revelation and miracles. And what is revelation but
extra-human communications? All the sacred authors since Moses
have spoken of such communications. And what are miracles except
extraordinary and supernatural events par excellence since in their
theological definition they are derogations from the laws of nature?
The fact is that in rejecting the extraordinary and the supernatural,
they reject the very bases of religion itself. However, it is not from this
aspect that we wish to consider the subject. Spiritism does not have
to examine whether or not there are miracles; that is, whether God
can in certain cases break the eternal laws that govern the universe. In
that respect it leaves everything to freedom of belief. On the contrary,
Spiritism states and shows that the phenomena on which it is based
are only supernatural in appearance. To certain individuals, such
phenomena do not appear natural, because they are unusual and outside
the orbit of known events. However, they are no more supernatural
than all the other phenomena for which today’s science is providing
an explanation, and which appeared extraordinary in earlier times. All
spirit phenomena, without exception, are consequences of general laws.
They have revealed to us one of the forces of nature, an unknown force,
or rather one that has not been understood until today, but one that
observation has shown to be in the overall scheme of things. Spiritism,
therefore, lies less on the extraordinary and supernatural than religion
itself does. Those who attack it at this point do not comprehend it,
and even if they were highly learned, we would still say to them: if your
science, which has taught you so many things, has not shown you that
the realm of nature is infinite, you are but half scholars.

III

You have stated that you would like to cure your century of
a craze that threatens to invade the world. Would you rather the

Conclusion

world be invaded by the disbelief you seek to propagate? Is it not to
the absence of belief that we ought to attribute the relaxing of family
ties and the majority of the disorders that are controlling society? By
demonstrating the existence and immortality of the soul, Spiritism
revives faith in the future, uplifts discouraged hearts and enables
us to bear the tribulations of life with resignation. Would you dare
call this an evil? Two doctrines confront each other: one denies the
future; the other proclaims and proves it. One explains nothing; the
other explains everything, and in doing so it appeals to reason. One
sanctions selfishness; the other offers a basis for justice, charity, and
the love of one’s neighbor. The former affirms only the present and
erases all hope; the latter consoles and shows the vast field of the
future. Which of the two is the more pernicious?
Certain individuals  – among the most skeptical  – present
themselves as apostles of fraternity and progress. However, true
fraternity implies selflessness and the renunciation of self-centeredness.
The sentiment of pride is an anomaly to true fraternity. By what right
do you impose a sacrifice on those to whom you state that at death
everything will be over for them, and that perhaps tomorrow they
will be nothing more than an old worn-out and discarded machine?
What reason would they have to impose any privation on themselves?
Is it not more natural that in the few moments granted to them they
would try to live as well as possible? This gives rise to the desire to
possess more and more in order to enjoy life better. It also gives birth
to jealousy of those who possess even more, and from such jealousy
to the desire to rob and steal there is only a single step. What is there
to prevent this? The law? Unfortunately, the law does not cover all
cases. Would you say it is conscience, a sense of duty? But upon what
do you base this sense of duty? Can its reason for existing be found
in the belief that everything ends with life? According to this belief,
only one maxim is rational: “Every man for himself.” The ideas of
fraternity, conscience, duty, humanity and progress are no more than

Conclusion

empty words. You, who proclaim similar doctrines, you do not know
all the evil you cause society, or how many crimes you are responsible
for! But why do I speak of responsibility at all? There is no such thing
for skeptics; they only render homage to matter.

IV

The progress of humankind has as its principle the practical
application of the law of justice, love and charity, and this law is
founded on the certainty of the future. Take away that certainty and
you take away its cornerstone. All others are derived from this law
because it entails all the conditions of human happiness. It alone can
heal the afflictions of society, and we can judge this by comparing
various eras and peoples, since their conditions improve as this law
is better understood and better applied. In addition, if a partial and
incomplete application has produced such a real benefit, what would
happen if all social institutions were to take it as their basis? Could
that be possible? Yes. Those who have advanced ten steps can advance
twenty, and so on. We can evaluate the future based on the past. We
are already seeing that the hostilities among peoples are decreasing
little by little; that the barriers separating them fall as they become
civilized; that they are joining hands from one end of the world to
the other; that more justice is presiding over international laws; that
wars are becoming rarer and no longer exclude humane sentiments;
that uniformity is being established in relationships; that race and
caste distinctions are disappearing and people of different beliefs
are silencing their sectarian prejudices so that they may unite in the
worship of one and the same God. We are speaking of the peoples
that are at the forefront of civilization (see nos. 789-793). From every
aspect, however, we are still far from perfection, and there is still much
old residue to destroy before the last vestiges of barbarity disappear.
But will those vestiges be able to withstand the irresistible power of

Conclusion

progress and that living force which in itself is a law of nature? If the
present generation is more advanced than the last, why should the
next not be more advanced than ours? It will in fact be so through the
force of things: first, because with each generation, a few champions
of the old abuses die out every day, and thus society is increasingly
composed of new members who are free of the old prejudices; second,
because humans desire progress, they study the obstacles and employ
their efforts to overcome them – evolution is incontestable and future
progress cannot be put in doubt. People by nature desire to be happy
and they only seek progress to increase their happiness; apart from
happiness, progress would have no objective. What would be the value
of progress for them if the goal was not to improve their conditions?
Even so, after having attained the happiness that intellectual progress
can offer them, they will perceive that such happiness is not complete.
They will realize that such happiness is impossible without the security
and harmony in social relationships that can be found only in moral
progress. Thus, by the force of circumstances, they themselves will
drive progress along the path of morality, and Spiritism will offer them
the most powerful means for reaching the goal.

V

Those who state that Spiritist beliefs are threatening to
invade the world thereby proclaim its power, for an idea without
foundation and lacking in logic could not become universal. If
Spiritism is putting down roots everywhere, recruiting especially
from the enlightened classes – as has been widely acknowledged – it
is because it is founded upon truth. All the efforts of its detractors
will be useless, proving that, far from deterring its impulse, the very
ridicule which they have sought to heap upon it seems to have given
it new vigor. This result fully justifies what the Spirits have stated:

“Do not allow yourselves to be disquieted by opposition. Everything

Conclusion

they do against you will turn to your advantage, and your greatest
adversaries will serve your cause, in spite of themselves. Against the will
of God, the ill-will of human beings shall not prevail.”
With Spiritism, humankind must enter a new phase: moral
progress, which is Spiritism’s inevitable consequence. So stop
wondering at the speed at which Spiritist ideas are spreading due to
the satisfaction they provide to all those who delve into them, and
who see in them something more than a wasteful pastime. Since
men and women desire happiness above everything else, it is no
wonder they become interested in an idea that makes them happy.
The development of these ideas presents three distinct
periods: the first is that of curiosity aroused by the strangeness of
the phenomena; the second is that of reasoning and philosophy; the
third is that of application and consequences. The period of curiosity
has already passed. Contrary to what serious thought or reason infer,
curiosity only lasts for a certain amount of time, and once satisfied
it passes on to something new. But the same does not occur with
what is referred to as serious thought or reason. The second period
has already begun and the third will certainly follow. Spiritism has
especially progressed since it has become better understood in its
essential nature, and its reach has been acknowledged to touch the
most sensitive fiber of humankind: happiness, even in this world.
This is the cause of its spread, the secret of the power that is enabling
it to triumph. Its influence has not yet extended over the masses, but
it has already rendered happy those who have come to understand it.
Even those who have not witnessed any of the physical phenomena
of the manifestations will state, “Apart from the phenomena, Spiritist
philosophy explains to me what no other has ever explained. Through
simple reasoning, I find in it a rational explanation of the problems
that interest me the most – those of my future. It provides me with
peace, security and confidence. It frees me from the torments of
uncertainty, rendering the material aspects of life secondary.” As for

Conclusion

those who assail Spiritism, I respond: Would you like to fight against
it successfully? If so, simply replace it with something better. Find a
more philosophical solution to all the problems it resolves. Give people
another certainty that will render them happier. However, you must
thoroughly understand the reach of that word certainty, because people
only accept as certain what appears to be logical. Do not think it is
enough to state that something does not exist – denying something is
too easy. Go beyond simple denial and prove through solid facts that
it is not viable, never has been and never can be. And in such a case,
state clearly what you would put in its place. Furthermore, prove that
Spiritism has not rendered humans better and therefore happier by
encouraging the purest Gospel-oriented morality, a morality that is
very much praised but very little practiced. When you have done all
this, you will have a right to assail it. Spiritism is powerful because it
is supported on the very bases of religion itself – God, the soul, future
rewards and punishments  – and especially because it shows such
rewards and punishments to be the natural consequences of earthly
life. The picture it paints of the future contains nothing that can
be contested by the most demanding reason. You, whose doctrine
consists entirely in denying the future, what compensation do you
offer for the suffering found in this world? You uphold yourselves
on disbelief, whereas Spiritism supports itself on trust in God. It
invites everyone to happiness, to hope, to true fraternity, whereas you
offer them nothingness as a prospect and selfishness as a consolation.
Spiritism explains everything; you explain nothing. It proves by
facts; you prove nothing. Why would you expect people to hesitate
between these two doctrines?

VI

It would be quite erroneous to believe that the power of
Spiritism derives from the practice of material manifestations,

Conclusion

and that therefore by hampering them one could undermine its
foundations. However, its power is in its philosophy, in the appeal it
makes to reason and common sense. In antiquity, it was the object of
mysterious study, carefully hidden from the common folk. Today, it
holds no secrets from anyone and it speaks a clear language without
ambiguity. There is neither mysticism in it nor any allegories prone
to erroneous interpretation. It wishes to be understood by all because
the time has come to enable humankind to know the truth. Far from
opposing the diffusion of the light, it desires light for all. It does not
demand blind faith but wants everyone to know why they believe,
and since it is based on reason, it will always be more powerful than
doctrines based on nothingness. Could the obstacles that have been
set up against the free expression of spirit manifestations silence them?
No, such obstacles would have the effect of all other prohibitions:
that of exciting curiosity and the desire to investigate what is being
prohibited. On the other hand, if spirit manifestations were the
personal privilege of only a single individual, no one would doubt
that if that individual were out of the way, the manifestations would
cease. Unfortunately for our adversaries, the manifestations are within
everybody’s reach and are being utilized by all, from the least to the
greatest, from the palace to the hovel. It might be possible to prevent
them from being produced in public, but it is well known that they
are more effectively produced not in public but in private. In addition,
since all persons are mediums in one way or another, how would it be
possible to prevent family members in their own home, individuals
in the silence of their bedroom, or prisoners in their cell and in the
presence of their executioners from having communications with the
spirits around them? If mediums were forbidden in one country, could
they be hindered in neighboring countries or in the entire world since
there is not a single region in the two halves of the world in which
there are no mediums? In order to imprison all the mediums, it would
be necessary to detain half the human race. If it were possible to burn

Conclusion

all the Spiritist books – not an easy task – they would be reproduced
the next day because their source cannot be stricken, and because one
could never imprison or burn the Spirits, their true authors.
Spiritism is not the work of any one individual. No one can
claim to be its author, for it is as old as creation itself. It is found
everywhere, in all religions, especially in Catholicism, where, in
actuality, it has more authority than in all the others. Catholicism
contains the principles of all the manifestations: spirits of every
degree, their secret or patent relationships with humankind,
guardian angels, reincarnation, the emancipation of the soul during
life, second sight, visions, manifestations of every kind, and even
tangible apparitions. As for depictions of demons, they are no more
than evil spirits, and except for the belief that demons have turned
to wickedness forever – whereas evil spirits have the path of progress
open before them – there is no other difference but the name.
So what does modern Spiritist science do? It joins into a whole
what has been scattered. It explains in its own terms what has only
been known in allegorical language and it eliminates everything
that superstition and ignorance have created, leaving only what is
real and positive – this is its role. But the role of founder does not
belong to it. It reveals what already exists; it coordinates, but creates
nothing, for its foundations may be found in all ages and places.
Who would thus dare feel strong enough to stifle it by sarcasm or
even by persecution? If it were proscribed in one place, it would
reappear in others exactly as it had been when it was banned because
it exists in nature itself and humans have not been given the ability
to obliterate a power of nature or veto the decrees of God.
Furthermore, what interest would there be in hampering the
publication of Spiritist ideas? It is true that such ideas have arisen
against the abuses that spring from pride and selfishness, but these
abuses, which are profitable to some, injure the masses. Spiritism will
therefore have the masses on its side, and will have no serious adversaries

Conclusion

except those interested in maintaining such abuses. Instead, under its
influence, its ideas will render people better toward one another, less
avid about material interests and more resigned before the decrees of
Providence, thus guaranteeing order and tranquility.

VII

Spiritism is presented under three different aspects: the
manifestations, the philosophical and moral principles deduced from
the manifestations, and the practical applications of those principles.
Hence, there are three classes or three degrees of its adherents:
first, those who believe in the manifestations and limit themselves
to proving them  – it is for them a science of experimentation;
second, those who comprehend its moral consequences; third, those
who practice or endeavor to practice its morality. Whatever may
be the scientific or moral point of view from which these strange
phenomena are regarded, everyone perceives that they represent a
new order of ideas, whose consequences will promote a profound
modification for the better in the state of humankind.
As for our adversaries, we may also group them into three
categories. In the first are those who systematically deny everything
new or anything that does not proceed from their own minds,
and who address the issue without knowing its cause. To this class
belong all those who admit nothing beyond the testimony of their
senses. They have seen nothing and want to see nothing – even less
to delve into anything. They would even become troubled if they
saw things too clearly, afraid of being forced to confess that they
have been wrong. For them, Spiritism is a fantasy, an insanity, a
utopia – it has no real existence, and that is the end of the matter.
These are the unbending disbelievers. At their side are those who
have only condescended to glance at the subject long enough to
ease their conscience in order to be able to say: I wanted to see, but

Conclusion

have seen nothing. They do not understand that it might require
more than half an hour to take in an entire science.
In the second category are those who know very well what to
think of the reality of the phenomena but they nevertheless oppose
them for reasons of personal interest. They know that Spiritism is
authentic, but they fear its consequences and attack it as an enemy.
In the third category are those who find in Spiritist morals a censure
that is too severe for their behavior and inclinations. If they were to
take Spiritism seriously, it would inconvenience them. They neither
reject nor accept it, but prefer to shut their eyes to it. The first are
swayed by pride and presumption; the second, by ambition and the
third, by selfishness. Of course, since these causes of opposition lack
consistency, they must disappear with time. We would seek in vain
for a fourth class of antagonists, who would base their opposition
on evidence that would demonstrate a conscientious and detailed
study of the issue. People have discounted Spiritism but no one has
presented a serious and irrefutable demonstration to the contrary.
It would be presuming too much of human nature to believe
that it could suddenly be transformed by Spiritist ideas. Acting on
these ideas will certainly differ in degree of intensity among those
who profess them. Whatever their results may be – even if weak –
they will nevertheless represent an improvement. If nothing else,
they would provide proof of the existence of an extra-corporeal
world, which in itself would negate materialist doctrines. This is
the result of a simple observation of the phenomena, but among
those who comprehend the Spiritist philosophy and see in it
something more than the more or less curious phenomena, there
are other effects. The first and most general is that of developing a
religious sentiment, even in those who without being materialists
are indifferent to spiritual things. For them, this will result in a loss
of the fear of death. We are not saying they will desire death – far
from it – for Spiritists will defend their lives like anyone else, but

Conclusion

they will feel indifferent about it, which will enable them to accept
inevitable death without complaint or regret and be assured that a
happier state will ensue. The second effect, perhaps as general as the
first, is resignation in the face of life’s afflictions. Spiritism enables us
to see things from such a height that earthly life loses three fourths
of its importance and we are no longer disturbed by its tribulations.
Hence, we have more courage in our troubles and more moderation
in our desires. We also have an aversion to the desire to shorten our
own life, for Spiritist knowledge teaches that suicide always causes
the loss of what it was intended to gain. The certainty of a future
where happiness depends on ourselves, along with the possibility
of establishing relationships with those who are dear to us, provide
supreme consolation to our spirit. Our horizons are widened to
infinity by our constant vision of the life beyond the grave, a life
whose deepest mysteries we are allowed to probe. The third effect
is that of awakening tolerance for others’ shortcomings. It must be
admitted, however, that selfishness and everything that issues from it
are the most tenacious sentiments in humans, and consequently the
most difficult to uproot. We can make voluntary sacrifices provided
they cost us nothing, and especially provided they deprive us of
nothing. Money still exerts an irresistible attraction on the majority
of humankind, and very few understand the word superfluous in
connection with their own selves. Thus, the renunciation of the self
is the most eminent sign of progress.

VIII

Some people have asked: Do spirits teach us a new morality,
something superior to what Christ taught? And if this morality is
none other than that of the Gospel, what has Spiritism come to
do? This reasoning is strangely familiar to that of Caliph Omar in
speaking of the Library of Alexandria: “If it contains only what is

Conclusion

found in the Koran, it is useless and should therefore be burned; if
it contains anything else, it is evil and should be burned.” Indeed,
Spiritism does not contain a different morality than that of Jesus, but
we must in turn ask: Hadn’t the law of God already been revealed by
Moses to humans before the advent of Christ? Isn’t Christ’s doctrine
found in the Decalogue? And will it therefore be stated that Jesus
had no reason to give his moral teachings? We will ask those who
deny the usefulness of Spiritist morality why Christ’s morality is
practiced so little, and why even those who proclaim its sublimity
are the first to violate the first of his laws: universal charity. The
Spirits have come not only to confirm Christ’s morality, but also to
show us its practical usefulness. They render intelligible and patent
certain truths that have only been taught under allegorical form, and
alongside morality the Spirits have come to define for us the most
abstract problems of psychology.
Jesus came to show humankind the road of true goodness.
Since God sent him to remind humans of God’s forgotten law, why
would God not send the Spirits to remind them more precisely,
now that they have forgotten it for the sake of pride and cupidity?
Who would dare to place limits on God’s power or to stipulate
the divine ways? Who will say that the appointed time has not
arrived – as the Spirits have affirmed – and that the days have not
arrived in which truths badly comprehended or falsely interpreted
must be ostensibly revealed to humankind to accelerate their
advancement? Is there not something providential in the spirit
manifestations being produced simultaneously all over the globe?
It is not a single individual, a prophet who has come to warn us;
instead, the light is shining far and wide and a whole new world is
unfolding before our eyes. Just as the invention of the microscope
has revealed the unsuspected world of the infinitely small, and
as the telescope has revealed the myriads of unsuspected worlds,
spirit communications have revealed the existence of an invisible

Conclusion

world surrounding us, whose inhabitants rub elbows with us at
every moment, participating in everything we do despite our will.
Yet, in a short time, the existence of that world that surely awaits
all of us will be as incontestable as the microscopic world and the
great globes lost in space. Would it not have been to our advantage
therefore to have been given notice of this world and to have been
initiated into the mysteries of the life beyond the grave? It is true
that these discoveries – if we may call them such – are contrary
to certain established ideas. However, is it not true that all great
scientific discoveries have also modified and even overthrown the
most established concepts? Has it not been necessary for our selfcenteredness to bow down before the evidence? The same will
occur with Spiritism, and soon it will have the rights of citizenship
among the rest of the areas of human knowledge.
Communications with the beings beyond the grave have
enabled us, as a result, to comprehend and behold our future life, and
to initiate us into the sorrows and joys that await us according to our
merits. They have led persons to spiritualism, persons who did not see
in human beings anything more than matter, anything more than an
organized machine. Hence, we are correct in stating that Spiritism has
killed materialism because of these communications. Had it produced
nothing else, the social order would still have to be grateful for that.
But it does even more by showing the inevitable consequences of
evil, and consequently, the necessity of the good. The number of
those in whom it has aroused better sentiments, neutralizing their
evil inclinations and turning them from wrongdoing, is greater
than supposed and is increasing every day. For them, the future is
no longer a vague idea, nor a simple hope, but a reality that can be
comprehended and explained once they see and hear those who have
gone before us as they lament or rejoice over what they did on earth.
Those who witness these communications are led to reflect on them
and to feel the need to know, judge and amend themselves.

Conclusion

IX

The adversaries of Spiritism were quick to arm themselves
against it by using some differences of opinion concerning certain
points of the Doctrine. It is not surprising that at the beginning of any
science contradictory theories appear that are based on incomplete
observations while each individual is still considering it from his or
her own point of view. However, three fourths of such theories with
regard to Spiritism have already been scuttled in the light of more
in-depth studies, beginning with the theory that attributes all spirit
communications to the Spirit of Evil, as if it were impossible for
God to send good spirits to humankind instead. Such is an absurd
doctrine because it is belied by the facts, and is impious because it
is a denial of the power and goodness of the Creator. The Spirits
have always advised us not to trouble ourselves with differences of
opinion since unity will occur and has already occurred concerning
the majority of the issues, whereas differences are disappearing day
by day. To the question: While awaiting unity, upon what basis can
an impartial and disinterested inquirer formulate a judgment? The
Spirits have given us this response:

“The purest light is not eclipsed by any cloud; the flawless
diamond is the one of greatest value, so judge the Spirits by the purity
of their teachings. Do not forget that among spirits there are those
who have not yet freed themselves from the ideas of earthly life. Learn
to distinguish them by their language; judge them by the sum of what
they tell you; see whether there is logical sequence in their ideas, and
whether there is anything in what they say that reveals ignorance,
pride or malevolence; in other words, whether their expressions are
always marked with the stamp of wisdom that reveals true superiority.
If your world were inaccessible to error, it would be perfect, but it is far
from perfection because you are still learning to distinguish error from
truth. You need the lessons of experience to exercise your judgment

Conclusion

and to enable you to evolve. Unity will be found on the side where
good has never been mixed with evil. It is on that side that people will
be connected with one another through the force of circumstances,
for they will realize that the truth lies there.

“Besides, what do a few variances that are more a matter of
form than depth matter? Observe that the fundamental principles
of Spiritism are the same everywhere, and must unite you all in a
common thought: the love of God and the practice of the good.
Therefore, no matter what may be the mode of progression that
is accepted or the normal conditions of your future existence, the
final aim is always the same: doing good, and as you know, there
are not two ways of doing it.”
If among the followers of Spiritism there are those who
differ in their opinions about some points of its theory, all of them
are nevertheless in agreement on the fundamental points. Thus,
there is unity, except on the part of a very small number who do
not yet accept the intervention of spirits in the manifestations,
either attributing them to purely physical causes  – contrary to
the axiom that every intelligent effect must have an intelligent
cause – or to the reflection of our own thought – disproved by
the facts. The remaining points are secondary and in no way
damage the fundamental bases. There may be other schools that
seek enlightenment concerning the as-yet controversial parts of
the science, but there must not be rival sects. There should only
be antagonism between those who desire to do good and those
who have done or would desire to do evil. However, there is no
authentic Spiritist, who, after having adopted the great moral
maxims taught by the Spirits, could ever desire evil or wish evil
upon a neighbor whatever their difference of opinion. If any such
school is in error, sooner or later it will be enlightened if there
is good faith and an absence of prejudice. While they wait, all
schools possess a common bond that should unite them in the

Conclusion

same thought. All of them have the same objective. The course
they take matters little, provided it leads to this objective. No
school should impose its opinion through material or moral force,
and the one that anathematized another would be on a false path,
for it would obviously be acting under the influence of evil spirits.
Reason must always be the last argument, and moderation will
better ensure the triumph of the truth than diatribes full of the
poison of envy and jealousy. Good spirits preach only unity and
love for one’s neighbor, and a malevolent or uncharitable thought
could never proceed from a pure source.
In order to conclude, let us hear the counsels of St.
Augustine’s spirit concerning the subject:

“For a long time, humans have torn at one another and
have anathematized one another in the name of a God of peace
and of mercy, offending God through such sacrilege. Spiritism
is the bond that will someday unite them, for it will show them
where the truth is and where the error lies. For some time to come,
however, there will continue to be scribes and Pharisees who will
deny it as they denied the Christ. Would you like to know which
spirits influence the various sects that divide the world? Judge them
by their deeds and by their principles. Good spirits have never
instigated evil; they have never counseled or condoned murder
and violence; they have never aroused party-hatreds, the thirst for
wealth or the greed for earthly things. Only persons who are good,
humane and benevolent toward all are their favorites as they are
also Jesus’ favorites, for they follow the path that leads to him.”
ST. AUGUSTINE