Convulsionaries

Question 481:
Do spirits play any role in the phenomena produced among
individuals called convulsionaries?

Answer:
“Yes, a very large one, as does magnetism, its primary
source. But charlatanism has frequently exploited and
exaggerated the phenomena, thereby making them appear
to be ridiculous.”

– In general, of what nature are the spirits who concur in
these types of phenomena?

“They are little-evolved. Do you believe that evolved
spirits would enjoy such things?”

Question 482:
How can the abnormal state of convulsionaries and hysterical
persons suddenly extend to an entire population?

Answer:
“By
sympathetic
effect.
Mental
dispositions
are
communicated more easily in certain cases. You are not
such a stranger to the effects of magnetism that you cannot
understand this fact and the role certain spirits play in it
through their sympathy with those who cause it.”53

Among the remarkable faculties noted in convulsionaries, we easily
recognize some of which somnambulism and mesmerism offer
numerous examples. Such are, among others: physical insensitivity,
mind reading, empathetic transmission of pain, etc. Thus, it cannot
be doubted that such individuals-in-crisis are in a type of awakened
somnambulistic state caused by the influence they exert on one
another. They are both magnetizers and magnetized at the same
time without even realizing it.

Question 483:
What is the cause of the physical insensitivity displayed both
among certain convulsionaries and among other individuals
submitted to the most atrocious tortures?

Answer:
“Among some, it is an exclusively magnetic effect,
acting on the nervous system in the same manner as
certain substances. Among others, the exaltation of
thought deadens sensitivity because life seems to have
withdrawn from the body in order to be transferred
to the spirit. Don’t you know that when the spirit is
intensely concerned with something, the body does not
feel, hear or see?”

In cases of torture, fanatic exaltation and enthusiasm often offer
an example of calmness and cool-bloodedness, in which acute pain
could not have been overcome unless one were to accept the fact
that sensitivity had been neutralized by some kind of anesthetic
effect. We know that frequently, in the heat of combat, a grave
wound is often not felt at all, whereas under normal circumstances
an ordinary scratch causes tears.

Since these phenomena depend on a physical cause and the action
of certain spirits, one may ask how, in some cases, it rested on
civil authorities to put a stop to them. The reason is simple. The
action of spirits here is secondary; they do nothing more than take
advantage of a natural disposition. The authorities did not suppress
the disposition itself, but rather the cause that maintained and
excited it – which then went from active to latent. They had reason
to act this way because the event resulted in abuse and scandal. We
know, furthermore, that such intervention is powerless when the
action of spirits is direct and spontaneous.