Second Sight

Question 447:
Does the phenomenon called “second sight” have any
connection to dreaming and somnambulism?

Answer:
“All of this is one and the same thing. What you call second sight
is, again, the spirit in a state of greater freedom, even though
the body is not asleep. Second sight is the sight of the soul.”

Question 448:
Is second sight permanent?

Answer:
“The faculty, yes; the ability to exercise it, no. On worlds
less material than yours, spirits disengage themselves more
easily, and while still maintaining articulated language,
they communicate with one another through thought
only. Second sight is also a permanent faculty for the
majority of them. Their normal state may be compared
to that of your lucid somnambulists, and that is also why
they manifest themselves to you more easily than those
who are incarnated in denser bodies.”

Question 449:
Does second sight develop spontaneously or by the will of those
who possess it?

Answer:
“Most of the time it is spontaneous, but the will can often
play a large role too. Thus, you can take certain individuals
called fortune tellers, for example, some of whom possess this
faculty of second sight, and you will see that it is their own
will that helps them enter such a state – what you call vision.”

Question 450:
Is second sight capable of being developed through practice?

Answer:
“Yes, effort always leads to progress, and the veil that
covers things becomes clearer.”

– Is this faculty linked to one’s physical organization?

“Certainly, physical organization plays its role, and there
are organizations that are incompatible with this faculty.”

Question 451:
Why does second sight appear hereditary in certain families?

Answer:
“It is due to similarity of organizations – transmitted like
other physical qualities  – and afterwards, development
of the faculty through a kind of education, which is also
transmitted from one to the next.”

Question 452:
Is it true that certain circumstances can cause second sight to
develop?

Answer:
“Illness, the approach of danger or a large crisis may
develop it. In such instances, the body is sometimes in
a particular state that allows the spirit to see what you
cannot see with the eyes of your body.”

Times of crisis, calamity and great emotion; in short, all the causes
of mental over-excitement sometimes bring about the development
of second sight. It seems that in the presence of danger, Providence
has given us the means of calling on it. All persecuted sects and
individuals offer numerous instances of this fact.

Question 453:
Are persons gifted with second sight always aware of it?

Answer:
“Not always. For them it is a completely natural thing,
and many believe that if others paid closer attention to
themselves, they would realize they possess the same faculty.”

Question 454:
May we attribute to a sort of second sight the astuteness of certain
persons who, without appearing to have anything extraordinary
about them, judge things with more precision than others?

Answer:
“It always involves the soul. The soul radiates more freely
and judges better than when under the veil of matter.”

– In certain cases, can this faculty provide foreknowledge of
future events?

“Yes. It may also provide a presentiment. There are many
degrees of this faculty and the same individual may possess
all or only some of them.”