Outward Worship Forms

Question 653:
Does worship require outward expression?

Answer:
“True worship comes from the heart. In all your actions,
always remember that the Lord is watching you.”

– Are outward worship forms useful nonetheless?

“Yes, if they are not a vain pretense. They are always
useful for setting a good example, but those who practice
such forms of worship only out of affectation and vanity,
belying their appearance of piety, set a bad example
rather than a good one, and they do more harm than
they can imagine.”

Question 654:
Does God have any preference for those who worship in this or
that manner?

Answer:
“God prefers those who sincerely worship from the bottom
of their heart, doing good and avoiding evil, to those who
think they honor God through ceremonies that do not
render them any better than their neighbor.

“All are brothers and sisters, children of the same God,
and God calls all those who follow the divinely established
laws, whatever may be the form in which they express
themselves.

“Those who only put on an appearance of piety are
hypocrites; those for whom worship is only a pretense that
is contradicted by their actual conduct set a bad example.

“Those who profess to worship Christ, but who are proud,
envious and jealous, who are hard and unforgiving toward
others, or who are ambitious for worldly things, I declare
to you that their religion is on their lips only and not in
their heart. God, who sees everything, will say: Those who
know the truth are a hundred times guiltier of the evil they
do than the unknowing nomad in the desert, and they will
be treated accordingly on judgment day. If a blind person
passing by you accidentally knocks you down you forget
about it, but if it is a person whose sight is perfect, you
rightly take offense.

“So do not ask if there is one particular form of worship that is
the most acceptable, since that would be like asking whether
it is more pleasing to God to be worshipped in one language
rather than in another. I will say to you once more: hymns do
not reach God except through the door of the heart.”

Question 655:
Is it wrong to practice a religion that is not believed in from
the bottom of the heart if it is done out of human respect and
in order not to offend those who think differently?

Answer:
“As in so many other things, the intent is the rule. Those
whose sole aim is to show respect for the beliefs of others
do no wrong; in fact, they do better than those who
would ridicule such beliefs, since that would show a lack
of charity. However, those who practice a religion out of
ulterior motives or ambition are contemptible in the sight
of God and humankind. God could not be pleased with
those who only put on a show of humility in order to gain
the approval of others.”

Question 656:
Is group worship preferable to individual worship?

Answer:
“Those who assemble for communion of thought and
sentiment have more power to attract good spirits, and the

same applies when they gather to worship God. But do not
think that individual worship is therefore less effective, for
each individual can worship God with divine thoughts.”