The Origin and Nature of Spirits

Question 76:
How may we define spirits?

Answer:
“We can say that spirits are the intelligent beings of
creation. They populate the universe beyond the
material world.”

Question 77:
Are spirits beings distinct from the Divinity or are they only
emanations or portions of the Divinity – the reason why they
are called the children of God?

Answer:
“Good gracious! Of course they are God’s work. It is like
a man who builds a machine, for example; the machine is
the man’s work but it is not the man himself. You know
that when individuals make nice and useful things they
call them their children, their creation. Well then, it is
the same with God. We are God’s children because we are
products of the divine work.”

Question 78:
Did spirits have a beginning or have they existed from all
eternity like God?

Answer:
“If spirits had no beginning, they would be equal to God;
on the contrary, they are God’s creation and subject to
the divine will. God has existed from all eternity – that
is incontestable – but we know nothing as to when and
how we spirits were created. You could say that we had
no beginning if you mean that since God is eternal, then
God must have always and unceasingly created spirits.
Nevertheless, when and how each of us was created
individually, I will repeat: no one knows. It is a mystery.”

Question 79:
Since there are two general elements in the universe, i.e. the
intelligent element and the material element, could we say
that spirits are formed from the intelligent element, while
inert bodies are formed from the material element?

Answer:
“Obviously. Spirits are individualizations of the intelligent
principle, just as bodies are individualizations of the
material principle. It is the time and manner of this
formation that we do not know.”

Question 80:
Is the creation of spirits continuous or did it only occur at the
beginning of time?

Answer:
“It is continuous, which means that God has never ceased
creating them.”

Question 81:
Are spirits formed spontaneously or do they proceed from one
another?

Answer:
“Like all other creatures, God creates them by the divine
will; but let me repeat once more: their origin is a mystery.”

Question 82:
Is it correct to say that spirits are immaterial?

Answer:
“How can we define something when we have no terms
for comparison, and when we only have an insufficient
language at our disposal? Can one who is born blind define
light? ‘Immaterial’ is not the right word; ‘incorporeal’
would be more precise, because you should understand
that, since it is a creation, a spirit must be something.
A spirit is quintessentialized matter27; thus, you have no
analogies for describing it. It is also so etherealized that
your senses cannot perceive it.”

We say that spirits are immaterial because their essence differs from
everything we label as “matter.” A nation of blind people would not
have any words for expressing light and its effects. Those who are in fact
born blind imagine that they perceive everything through their hearing,
smell, taste and touch, but they would not be able to comprehend
ideas that came to them through the sense they lack. In the same way,
we too are “blind” regarding the essence of supra-human beings. We
cannot define them except by an effort involving our imagination or by
making comparisons that will always be imperfect.

Question 83:
Do spirits have an end? We can understand that the principle
from which they emanate is eternal, but what we are asking
is whether or not their own individuality will come to an
end and whether or not, like material bodies, at some given
time in the near or distant future the element from which
they have been formed will disintegrate and return to the
mass from which it came. It is difficult to understand how
something that had a beginning would not also have an end.

Answer:
“There are many things that you do not understand
because your intelligence is limited, but that is no reason
to reject them. A child does not understand everything
that its parents understand, nor does an uneducated
person understand all that a scholar understands. We are
saying that spirits’ individual existences never come to an
end – that is all that we can say for now.”

27 Quintessence means 5th essence: the pure and concentrated essence of a substance
(Webster’s, op. cit.) – Tr.