Free Will

Question 843:
Do humans act with free will?

Answer:
“Since they have freedom of thought, they have freedom
of action. Without free will, human beings would be
machines.”

Question 844:
Do people enjoy free will from the moment of birth?

Answer:
“They have the freedom to act from the moment they
have a will to act. During the first phases of life, freedom is
almost non-existent. It develops and changes its objectives
as the faculties develop. Since the thoughts of children are
in proportion to the needs of their age, they apply their
free will to things that are necessary for them.”

Question 845:
Aren’t the instinctive predispositions that individuals bring at
birth an obstacle to the exercise of their free will?

“Instinctive predispositions arise from those of the spirit
before its incarnation. Depending on how much the spirit
has evolved, these predispositions can incite the individual
to reprehensible acts, in which he or she will be aided by
spirits who sympathize with such dispositions. However,
there is no irresistible incitement if the individual has the
will to resist. Remember: ‘where there is a will, there is a
way.’” (See no. 361)

Question 846:
Doesn’t our organism have an influence on our actions in life?
If so, isn’t it at the expense of our free will?

Answer:
“The spirit is certainly influenced by matter, which may
hinder its manifestations. That is why, on worlds where
bodies are less material than on earth, the faculties develop
with more freedom; however, the instrument does not
give faculties to the spirit. Furthermore, in this case it
is necessary to distinguish between moral faculties and
intellectual faculties. If individuals have an instinct for
murder, it is assuredly their own spirit that possesses it,
and which transmits it to them – it never arises due to
their bodily organs. Those who suppress their thought in
order to occupy themselves with matter become like an
animal, and even worse, since they no longer think about
being on guard against evil. It is in this that they become
culpable because they act in this manner of their own free
will.” (See nos. 367 ff. Influence of the organism)

Question 847:
Can a distortion of the faculties deprive humans of their free will?

Answer:
“Those whose intelligence is impaired by any cause are no
longer in complete control of their thought, and thereafter
they have no more freedom. Such distortion is frequently
a punishment for the spirit, who might have been vain
and proud and might have made bad use of its faculties
in another existence. It may be reborn in the body of
someone who is mentally impaired, as the despot in the
body of a slave, and the spiteful wealthy person in that of a
beggar. The spirit, however, is perfectly conscious of such
constraint and suffers from it. It is in this constraint that
one sees the action of matter.” (See nos. 371 ff.)

Question 848:
Does the distortion of the intellectual faculties because of
drunkenness excuse reprehensible acts?

Answer:
“No, because drunkards intentionally deprive themselves
of their reason in order to satisfy their crude passions;
instead of one wrong they commit two.”

Question 849:
In humans in the primitive state, what is the dominant
faculty: instinct or free will?

Answer:
“Instinct, which does not impede their acting with entire
freedom in certain things. Like children, they first apply this
freedom to their needs; it develops later through intelligence.
Consequently, you, who are more enlightened than primitive
peoples, are more responsible for your acts than they are.”

Question 850:
Isn’t social position sometimes an obstacle to full freedom of
action?

Answer:
“The world undoubtedly has its demands. God is just and
takes everything into account, but holds you responsible
for the paltry efforts you make to overcome such obstacles.”