The Formation of Worlds

The universe is comprised of the infinite number of worlds we
can see and those we cannot see, all animate and inanimate
beings, all the heavenly bodies moving through space and all the
fluids23 that fill space.

Question 37:
Was the universe created or has it existed from all eternity
like God?

Answer:
“Obviously, the universe did not create itself, and if it has
existed from all eternity like God, then it could not be
God’s work.”

Reason tells us the universe could not possibly have created itself,
and since it could not possibly be the work of chance either, it must
be the work of God.

23 Fluids: “We call fluids those states in which matter is even more refined than it is in the
gaseous state.” (Gabriel Delanne, O Espiritismo perante a Ciência, pt. 4, chap. 3, Federação
Espírita Brasileira, 1993) – Tr.

Question 38:
How did God create the universe?

Answer:
“To borrow a well-known expression: by the divine will.
Nothing can better portray that all-powerful will than
those grand words from Genesis: ‘God said, ‘Let there be
light, and there was light.’”

Question 39:
Can we know about the way in which worlds are formed?

Answer:
“All that we can say and the only thing you can comprehend
is that worlds are formed by the condensation of the matter
scattered throughout space.”

Question 40:
In accordance with current beliefs, are comets a
commencement of the condensation of matter and worlds in
course of formation?

Answer:
“That is correct, but it is absurd to believe in their influence;
I mean the influence commonly attributed to them, for all
the celestial bodies play their part in influencing certain
physical phenomena.”

Question 41:
Could a completely formed world disappear and its compositional
matter be once again scattered in space?

Answer:
“Yes. God renews worlds just as God renews living beings.”

Question 42:
Can we know how long it has taken for worlds to form – the
earth, for instance?

Answer:
“I cannot tell you anything about that, for only the Creator
knows. Anyone who claimed to have such knowledge or
to know the ages and ages it took to form them would be
very foolish indeed.”