The Characteristics of Natural Law

Question 614:
What is meant by natural law?

Answer:
“Natural law is the law of God. It is the only law that is
truly necessary for human beings to be happy. It shows
them what they should or should not do, and they only
suffer misfortune when they depart from it.”

Question 615:
Is God’s law eternal?

Answer:
“It is as eternal and immutable as God is.”

Question 616:
Can God prescribe to humankind in one age what would be
prohibited in another?

Answer:
“God does not err. Humans are the ones who must modify
their laws because they are imperfect, but God’s laws are perfect.
The harmony regulating both the material and moral universe
is founded upon laws that God has established forever.”

Question 617:
What do the divine laws encompass? Do they apply to anything
other than moral conduct?

Answer:
“All the laws of nature are divine because God is the author
of all things. Scientists study the laws of matter, whereas
moral individuals study and practice the laws of the soul.”

– Do humans have the ability to master both the laws of
nature and the laws of matter?

“Yes, but a single existence is not enough to do so.”

If we consider only the distance separating the primitive from the
civilized individual, what, indeed, are a few years for acquiring
everything that comprises a perfected being? The longest life
possible is insufficient, and all the more so when it is cut short, as
happens with a large number of people.

Among the divine laws, some regulate the movement and workings
of inert matter. These are the physical laws and studying them
belongs to the domain of science.

Others specifically concern humans and their relations with God
and their fellow beings, encompassing the rules of the life of the
body and the soul. These are the moral laws.

Question 618:
Are the divine laws the same for all worlds?

Answer:
“Reason tells us they must be appropriate for the nature of
each world and proportioned to the degree of advancement
of the beings that inhabit them.”