The Separation of the Soul from the Body

Question 154:
Is the separation of the soul from the body a painful process?

Answer:
“No. Frequently, the body suffers more during life than
at the moment of death; the soul itself feels nothing at
death. The suffering that is sometimes experienced at the
moment of death is pleasure for the spirit, for it sees that the
end of its exile is at hand.”

In a natural death that results from the depletion of organic vitality
due to age, humans depart from life without even realizing it – like
a light that goes out for lack of energy.

Question 155:
How does the separation of the soul from the body occur?

Answer:
“Once the bonds that held the soul are ruptured, it
disengages itself.”

– Does this separation occur instantly and through an abrupt
transition? Is there a well-defined dividing line between life
and death?

“No, the soul liberates itself gradually. It does not escape
like a captive bird that is suddenly set free. These two
states touch and blend with each other; this way the spirit
disengages itself little by little from its bonds: they unravel;
they do not break.”

The spirit is connected to the body during life by its semi-material
envelope or perispirit. Death is the destruction of the body but not
of the perispiritual envelope, which separates from the body when
organic life ceases. Observation has shown that at the moment
of death, the spirit’s departure does not occur suddenly; it occurs
gradually and may vary in speed according to the individual. For
some, it is very quick indeed, and in such a case one could say
that the moment of death is also that of liberation, which actually
happens soon afterwards. However, for others, especially those
whose life has been materialistic and sensual, the separation takes
much longer, sometimes lasting for days, weeks and even months.
This does not imply that there is any vitality remaining in the
body or any possibility that it might return to life. It only means
that an affinity persists between the body and spirit, an affinity
that always depends on the importance that the spirit has given to
matter during life. It is logical to believe that the more the spirit
has identified with matter, the more it will suffer upon separating
from it. On the other hand, intellectual and moral activity and
elevated thoughts initiate this separation even during corporeal
life, and when death finally occurs, the separation is almost
instantaneous. All this is the result of studies involving individuals
at the moment of death, and demonstrates that the affinity that
persists between the soul and the body in some individuals can be

extremely painful – the spirit may even experience the horror of
decomposition. Such a case is exceptional and peculiar to certain
kinds of death – suicide, for example.

Question 156:
Can the definitive separation between soul and body occur
before the complete cessation of organic life?

Answer:
“Sometimes, in the death throes, the soul has already left
the body, which has nothing left in it except organic life.
The individual no longer has any self-awareness, and yet
a faint breath of life still remains. The body is a machine
that is kept going by the heart and it continues to live as
long as the heart circulates blood in the veins, and for that
it does not need the soul.”

Question 157:
At the moment of death, does the soul sometimes experience a
yearning or an ecstasy entailing a fore-glimpse of the world it
is about to reenter?

Answer:
“The soul often feels that the bonds holding it to the body
are loosening, and consequently it employs all its efforts to
sever them entirely. Already partially released from matter,
it beholds the future unfolding before it and it enjoys the
spirit state beforehand.”

Question 158:
Can the example of the caterpillar, which begins by crawling
on the ground, then shuts itself up in its cocoon in apparent
death to be reborn into a brilliant existence, provide us an
idea of terrestrial life, which is followed by the grave and then
a new existence?

Answer:
“A pale idea. The image is good but you must not take it
literally, as you are always prone to do.”

Question 159:
What sensation does the soul experience at the moment it
realizes that it is in the spirit world?

Answer:
“That depends. If it has done evil for the love of it, the
spirit is at first ashamed of what it has done. However, it

experiences something completely different if it has been
morally upright. It feels relieved of a great weight and does
not fear the most scrutinizing glance.”

Question 160:
Does a spirit immediately meet those whom it knew on earth,
and who died before it?

Answer:
“Yes, depending on the affection they had for one another.
They almost always come to receive it as it strives to return
to the spirit world, and they may even help free it from the
bonds of matter. It also sees many whom it had lost sight
of during its sojourn on earth. Additionally, it sees those
who are in the errant state and goes to visit those who are
still incarnate.”

Question 161:
In violent or accidental death, when the organs are not yet
debilitated by age or disease, does the separation of the soul
and the cessation of life occur simultaneously?

Answer:
“Usually so. In any case, however, the instant that separates
them is very short.”

Question 162:
After being beheaded, for example, does an individual remain
conscious for a few moments?

Answer:
“Frequently, it remains so for a few moments until the
organic life is extinguished once and for all. However,
many times the fear of death causes a loss of consciousness
before the actual moment of execution.”

This question refers simply to the consciousness that victims may
have of themselves by means of the body and not as a spirit. If
they do not lose consciousness before execution, they may preserve
it for a few very short moments, but they must necessarily lose it
with the organic life of the brain. This does not mean, however,
that the perispirit has completely disconnected from the body. On
the contrary, in all cases of violent death, i.e., when death does not
result from a gradual extinction of the vital forces, the bonds that
join the body to the perispirit are more tenacious and complete
separation is slower.