The Form and Ubiquity of Spirits

Question 88:
Do spirits have a specific, limited and constant form?

Answer:
“To your eyes, no; to ours, yes. You might say they resemble
a flame, a glow or an ethereal spark.”

– Does this flame or spark have a color?

“To you, it varies from the color of a dark ruby to a brilliant
one, depending on the degree of the individual spirit’s purity.”

Spirit beings are ordinarily represented with a flame or a star on their
brow; it is an allegory, which alludes to the essential nature of spirits.
The flame or star is placed there because that is the seat of intelligence.

Question 89:
Do spirits take any amount of time to travel across space?

Answer:
“Yes, but they are as fast as thought itself.”

– Isn’t thought the soul itself moving from one place to another?

“When the thought is in a place, the soul is there too,
since it is the soul that does the thinking. Thought is one
of its attributes.”

Question 90:
Is a spirit who moves from one place to another conscious of
the distance it travels and the space it crosses, or is it suddenly
at the place to which it wanted to go?

Answer:
“Either way. If it wants to, a spirit can be perfectly aware
of the distance it crosses, or such distance may seem to
disappear completely. It all depends on the spirit’s will and
the degree to which its nature is purified.”

Question 91:
Is matter an obstacle to spirits?

Answer:
“No, they can pass through anything: the air, the earth,
water, and even fire are all equally accessible to them.”

Question 92:
Do spirits have the gift of ubiquity? In other words, can one
and the same spirit divide itself up or be at various points all
at the same time?

Answer:
“A spirit cannot be divided up; however, each is a center
radiating in different directions and that is why it appears
to be in many places all at the same time. Look at the sun.
The sun is only one body, yet it radiates all around and

sends its rays to great distances; nevertheless, it does not
divide itself up.”

– Do all spirits radiate with the same power?

“Far from it; it depends on their degree of purity.”

Each spirit is an indivisible unit, but each one can extend its
thought in different directions without dividing itself up. We
should understand the gift of ubiquity attributed to spirits only in
this sense. A spirit is like a spark which projects its light far off, and
which can be perceived from all points of the horizon; or like an
individual who, without changing places or dividing him or herself
up, can transmit orders, signals, and movement to different points.