Biblical Considerations and Account

­concerning the Creation

Question 59:
Cultures have held widely differing ideas about creation,
according to their degree of understanding. With the
support of science, reason has recognized the improbability
of some of these theories. However, the one given by the
Spirits confirms the opinion long acknowledged by more
enlightened individuals.

The objection to such a theory is that it seems to contradict
the sacred texts, but a serious examination will lead to the
realization that this contradiction is more apparent than
real and that it results from the way an allegorical meaning
is interpreted.

The issue of the first man, personified in Adam, as being
the exclusive progenitor of humankind, is not the only
religious belief that has had to be modified. At one time,
the movement of the earth around the sun appeared so
contrary to the Scriptures that all kinds of persecutions
were carried out under such a pretext. Nevertheless, the
earth continued to move despite the anathemas and no
one today would dispute it without insulting reason itself.

The Bible also tells us that the world was created in six
days and it establishes the time of its creation at about
4,000 years before the Christian era. Before then, the earth
did not exist at all – it was created out of nothing. It is a
solemn text, yet physical science, inexorable science, has
proven the contrary. Earth’s formation is indelibly written
in the fossil record, and it has been proven that the six
days of creation represent successive periods, each lasting
perhaps many hundreds of thousands of years. This is not

Creation

a theory, a doctrine or an isolated opinion. It is a fact as
solid as is the movement of the earth around the sun, a
fact that theology can no longer refuse to accept, and it
demonstrates the error that one can fall into by attributing
literal truth to often-figurative language. Should we thus
conclude that the Bible is in error? No, rather, people err
in the way they interpret it.

In excavating earth’s archives, science has discovered the
order in which different living beings have appeared on
its surface, and this order is in agreement with the one
indicated in Genesis. The difference, however, is that
instead of having issued miraculously from the hand of
God in only a few hours, the work of creation did indeed
occur according to God’s will, but through the laws of
natural forces over millions of years. But does that make
God any less great and powerful? Is the sublimity of God’s
work lost because it did not appear instantaneously? Of
course not. We would have to have a petty idea about the
Divinity not to recognize the divine omnipotence in the
eternal laws established to govern the world. Far from
diminishing the divine work, science shows it to us under
a more magnificent aspect that better conforms to our
notions of God’s power and majesty precisely because the
work was done without disregard for the laws of nature.

Science places humankind last in the order of the creation
of living beings and is in tandem with the Mosaic record
on this point. However, that record puts the universal
flood at 1,654 years after the earth’s creation, whereas
geology shows us that this great cataclysm occurred before
humankind even appeared. So far, no traces have been found
in the primitive layers that would attest to the presence of
humans or of animals which, from a physical standpoint

at least, would be of the same category. However, nothing
has actually proven this to be impossible. Since many
discoveries have already raised questions about this issue,
it is possible that at any moment the material certainty
of the anteriority of the human race may come to light.
In that case, as well as in others, the Biblical text would
be shown to portray an allegory. The actual issue lies in
determining whether or not the geological cataclysm was
the same one as that of the Noah story. We know that
the time needed to form the fossil layers does not allow
any confusion; therefore, as soon as any vestiges of human
existence prior to the great catastrophe are found, it will
be proven either that Adam was not the first man, or that
his creation has been lost in the night of time. There is no
arguing against fact, and it would have to be accepted in
the same way as the movement of the earth and the six
days of creation.

The existence of the human race prior to the geological
flood is no doubt still hypothetical, but consider the
following: Affirming that humans first appeared upon
the earth 4,000 years B.C., and if all of them except for
a single family were wiped out 1,650 years later, then
the entire current population of the earth must have
originated from the time of Noah, i.e., 2,350 years B.C.
However, when the Hebrews migrated to Egypt in the
eighteenth century B.C., they found a densely populated
and highly civilized land. History also shows that at the
same time India and many other lands were flourishing
as well, and this fact does not take into account the
chronological tables of certain cultures that go back
even farther. Thus, it would have been necessary for
the descendants of a single individual’s family to have
populated, from the twenty-fourth to the eighteenth

Creation

century, i.e. 600 years, all the vast regions that had been
known about at the time (supposing that others had not
been populated). It would also have been necessary for
the human race during this brief period to have evolved
from its primitive state of total ignorance to the highest
degree of intellectual development. Both suppositions
are in contradiction to all anthropological laws.

Human race diversity supports this contradiction. Climate
and customs undoubtedly produce modifications in
physical characteristics, but these modifications can only
be carried so far, and physiological examinations prove the
existence among some races of constitutional differences
more profound than could be produced by climate alone.
The crossing of races produces intermediary types and
tends to erase extreme characteristics. It does not produce
these characteristics, however; it only creates varieties.
Thus, for the crossing of races to have occurred, it would
be necessary for there to have been distinct races in the first
place. But how could there have been distinct races if they
all came from one ancestor and especially in such a short
time? How could anyone believe that in only a few centuries
a few descendants of Noah had been transformed to the
point of producing the Ethiopian race, for example? Such
a metamorphosis would be as unlikely as the theory of a
common origin for wolves and sheep, aphids and elephants
or birds and fish. Once more, nothing can prevail against
the factual evidence. On the other hand, everything can
be explained if we admit that humans existed prior to the
time commonly assigned to their appearance; that their
origins were diverse; that Adam, who lived 6,000 years
ago, populated an uninhabited region; that “Noah’s flood”
was a localized catastrophe rather than the great geological
cataclysm; and finally, that we take into account the

allegorical form characteristic of the Oriental style, which
can be found in all the sacred books of every culture. That
is why it is prudent not to lightly accuse as erroneous those
doctrines which, like so many others, could someday enjoy
a retraction from individuals who currently oppose them.
Rather than being lost, religious ideas become even greater
when they march in step with science. This is the only way
to keep from being vulnerable to skepticism.
