The Fear of Death

Question 941:
The worry over death is highly vexing to many people. Why
such worry if they have the whole future in front of them?

Answer:
“It is wrong to have such apprehension, but what do you
expect? Since early on, people have been persuaded that
there is a hell and a heaven, and that they will most likely
go to hell because they have been taught that whatever
belongs to the realm of nature is a mortal sin for the soul.
Thus, when they grow up, and if they have any reason at
all, they can no longer accept such a belief and become
atheists or materialists. It is thus that they are led to believe
that nothing exists beyond the present life. As for those
who persist in their childhood belief, they fear the eternal
fire that must burn them without destroying them.

“But death does not inspire any fear in the righteous, for
faith gives them certainty about the future. Hope beckons
them with a better life, and since they have practiced the
law of charity, they have the assurance that in the world
into which they will enter, they will not find anyone into
whose eyes they will dread to look .” (See no. 730)

Carnal individuals are more connected to corporeal life than spiritual
life, and while on earth they experience only its physical pains and
pleasures. Their happiness consists in the fleeting satisfaction of all
their desires. Their soul is constantly concerned with and affected
by the vicissitudes of life, and hence it remains anxious and in
constant torment. Death terrifies them because they have doubts
about the future and because they believe that they must leave on
earth all their affections and hopes.

Even while in this world, moral persons, who have raised themselves
above the artificial needs created by the passions, experience
pleasures unknown to materialistic persons. The moderation of
their desires lends calmness and serenity to their spirit. Happy with
the good they do, there are no disappointments, and vexations pass
lightly over their soul without leaving any painful marks.

Question 942:
Won’t some people think that these counsels about happiness
are a little banal? Won’t they see them as being commonplace
or as platitudes, and won’t they say that the secret to happiness
is to know how to bear up under misfortune?

Answer:
“There are those who say that, and they are numerous.
Many of them, however, are like ill persons for whom the
doctor has prescribed a particular diet: they would like to
be healed without any medications and continue to hand
themselves over to indigestion.”