Errant Spirits

Question 223:
Does the soul reincarnate immediately after separation from
the body?

Answer:
“Sometimes it reincarnates immediately, but most often
after an interval of longer or shorter duration. On more
highly evolved worlds, reincarnation is almost always
immediate. Since the corporeal matter of those worlds is
less coarse, an incarnate spirit enjoys nearly all of its spirit
faculties. Its normal state is the same as that of your lucid
somnambulists.”

Question 224:
What becomes of the soul during the intervals between
incarnations?

“It becomes an errant spirit, aspiring to and awaiting a
new destiny.”

– How long may such intervals last?

“From a few hours to thousands of centuries. Strictly
speaking, there is no outside limit assigned to the errant
state. It may last for a very long time, but never forever.
Sooner or later, a spirit always has the opportunity to
begin another existence, which serves for the purification
of its previous ones.”

– Does the length of the interval depend on the spirit’s own
will, or can it be imposed as an expiation?

“It is a consequence of its free will. Spirits know full
well what they are doing in prolonging it, but for some,
extending it is also a punishment inflicted by God. Others
ask for it to be extended in order to pursue studies that
cannot be done productively except in the spirit state.”

Question 225:
Is the errant state in and of itself an indication of spirits who
are less evolved?

Answer:
“No, since there are errant spirits of every degree. Incarnation
is the state that is transitory, as we have already stated. In
their normal state, spirits are disengaged from matter.”

Question 226:
Could we say that all spirits who are not incarnate are errant?

Answer:
“Those who must reincarnate, yes, but the pure spirits,
who have reached perfection, are not errant: their state is
definitive.”

Regarding their inmost qualities, spirits belong to different orders
or degrees, through which they pass successively as they purify
themselves. Regarding their state as spirits, they may be incarnate,
that is, connected to a body; errant, that is, disconnected from
the material body while awaiting a new incarnation in order to

improve themselves; or pure, that is, perfected and having no
further need of incarnation.

Question 227:
How do errant spirits learn, since it can hardly be in the same
way as for us?

Answer:
“They study their past and seek ways to evolve. They watch
and observe what is going on in the realms through which
they pass. They listen to the discourse of enlightened
individuals and the counsels of spirits who are more
evolved than they are, and this provides them with ideas
that they do not yet possess.”

Question 228:
Do spirits retain any of the human passions?

Answer:
“Upon losing their corporeal envelope, high order spirits
leave evil passions behind and retain only the ideals of the
good, but low order ones retain their passions; otherwise,
they would belong to the first order.”

Question 229:
When they leave the earth behind, why don’t spirits abandon
their evil passions since they are able to see the trouble they
can cause?

Answer:
“In your world, there are persons who are excessively
jealous, for instance. Do you believe they will lose that
defect upon leaving? After they leave the earth, since
they are not entirely freed from matter – especially those
who have displayed strong passions – they retain a sort of
atmosphere around them that is infused with all their evil
qualities. They only occasionally glimpse the truth so as to
have the moral path revealed to them.”

Question 230:
Can a spirit progress while in the errant state?

Answer:
“It may improve itself a great deal; it always depends on its
own will and desire. However, it puts its newly-acquired
ideas into practice only during corporeal life.”

Question 231:
Are errant spirits happy or unhappy?

Answer:
“Their degree of happiness or unhappiness depends
on what they have merited. They either suffer from the
passions whose essence they have retained, or they are
happy according to their degree of dematerialization. In
the errant state, a spirit realizes what it lacks in order to
be happier; thus, it searches for the means to attain it.
However, it is not always permitted to reincarnate when it
wants to. This in itself is a punishment.”

Question 232:
While in the errant state, can spirits visit other worlds?

Answer:
“That depends. When the spirit leaves the body, it is still
not completely disconnected from matter. Hence, it still
belongs to the world on which it has lived – or to one of the
same degree – unless it has progressed sufficiently during
its lifetime. Progression is the purpose to which it must
hold, for it will never perfect itself unless it progresses.
Nevertheless, it may go to certain more highly evolved
worlds, but as an outsider; it can get only glimpses of such
worlds, and these glimpses are what drive it to improve
itself so that it may become worthy of the happiness
enjoyed on them, and to be able to inhabit them later.”

Question 233:
Do spirits who are already purified ever go to less evolved worlds?

Answer:
“They frequently do so in order to help such worlds
progress. Without these spirits, these worlds would be left
to themselves, without guides to direct them.”