Charity and Love for Our Neighbor

Question 886:
What is the true meaning of the word charity as Jesus
understood it?

Answer:
“Benevolence toward everyone, indulgence toward the
imperfections of others and forgiveness for offenses.”

Love and charity supplement the law of justice because loving our
neighbors is to do them all the good possible, all that we would wish
to be done to ourselves. Such is the meaning of Jesus’ words: “Love
one another as brothers.”

Charity, according to Jesus, is not restricted to alms-giving, but
embraces all our relations with our fellow humans, whether in
situations below, equal or superior to our own. It orders us to be
indulgent because we need indulgence ourselves, and it forbids us to
humiliate the unfortunate, contrary to what is commonly practiced.
Whenever wealthy persons seek us out, we regard them with an
overabundance of consideration and attention, but whenever poor
persons seek us out, it seems like we do not want to be troubled by
them. However, the more pitiable the situation of the latter, the more
we should refrain from increasing their disgrace through humiliation.
Those who are truly charitable seek to uplift the self-esteem of those
in lower positions, thereby diminishing the distance between both.

Question 887:
Jesus also taught: “Love even your enemies.” But isn’t loving
our enemies contrary to our natural tendencies, and doesn’t
enmity proceed from a lack of sympathy between spirits?

Answer:
“It is obviously not possible to show tender and passionate
love toward one’s enemies, and that is not what Jesus
wanted to say. Loving one’s enemies means to forgive
them and to return good for their evil. That is how we put
ourselves above them; by seeking vengeance, we only place
ourselves beneath them.”

Question 888:
What is to be thought of alms-giving?

Answer:
“Those who are reduced to begging for alms morally and
physically degrade themselves in an existence that puts
them on the level of the brute. A society based on the law
of God and justice should provide for the life of the weak
without humiliating them. It should ensure an existence
for those who cannot work, without leaving them at the
mercy of chance and goodwill.”

– Then do you condemn alms-giving?

“No, because it is not the alms-giving per se that is
reprehensible, but almost always the way in which it is
done. Moral individuals, those who understand charity
according to Jesus, seek out the unfortunate without
waiting for them to hold out their hand.

“True charity is always good and benevolent; it is
demonstrated both in the act itself and in the way it is
done. A service rendered with graciousness thus has a
double value; but if it is rendered with haughtiness, the
recipient’s need compels him or her to accept it but his or
her heart will hardly be touched.

“Also, remember that in God’s sight ostentation erases the
merit of benevolence. Jesus said: ‘Do not let your left hand
know what your right hand is doing.’ Therein, he teaches
you not to tarnish charity with pride.

“It is necessary to distinguish between alms-giving per se
and benevolence. The one who is most needy is not always
the one who begs; the fear of humiliation restrains the truly
poor, who almost always suffer without complaining. It is
these whom the authentically humane person knows how
to help without being ostentatious.

“Love one another – that is the whole law, the divine law
through which God governs the worlds. Love is the law of
attraction for living and organized beings, and attraction
is the law of love for inorganic matter.

“Never forget that a spirit, whatever its degree of
advancement or its situation as an incarnate individual or as
a discarnate spirit, is always placed between a more evolved
spirit who guides and perfects it, and a less evolved one
toward whom it has the same duties to fulfill. Therefore,
be charitable not only by taking from your bag a coin that
you callously give to the one who dares to beg from you,
but by seeking out hidden poverty. Be indulgent toward the
errors of your neighbor. Instead of despising the ignorant
and the addict, educate and moralize them. Be gentle and
benevolent toward all those who are less evolved than you.
Be the same toward the lowermost beings of creation, and
you will have obeyed the law of God.”

SAINT VINCENT DE PAUL

Question 889:
Aren’t there those who are reduced to begging through their
own fault?

Answer:
“Of course. But if a good moral education had taught them
the law of God, they would not have fallen into the excesses
that led them into ruin. It is upon this, above all, that the
improvement of your globe depends.” (See no. 707)