The Passions

Question 907:
Since the principle of our passions originates in nature, are
they evil per se?

Answer:
“No. Passion is the result of excess brought about by the
will, though the principle itself was given to humans for
their good. The passions can lead them to do great things.
Their abuse of them is what makes them evil.”

Question 908:
How may we define the limit at which the passions cease to be
good or bad?

Answer:
“The passions are like a horse that is useful when controlled but
dangerous when it controls. You can recognize when a passion
becomes harmful at the moment in which you cease to govern
it, and when it results in any injury to yourselves or others.”

The passions are levers that increase humans’ powers tenfold and
help them to fulfill the designs of Providence. However, if instead
of directing their passions they allow themselves to be directed by
them, they fall into excess, and the very power which in their hands
could have done good falls upon them and crushes them instead.

All the passions have their principle in a sentiment or need of
nature. Therefore, the principle of the passions is not evil, because
it rests upon one of the providential conditions of our existence.
Passion per se is the exaggeration of a need or sentiment – it is in
the excess and not in the cause – and such excess becomes evil when
it results in some kind of evil.

Every passion that brings us nearer to the animal nature takes us
further from the spiritual nature. Every sentiment that lifts us above
the animal nature announces the predominance of spirit over matter
and draws us closer to perfection.

Question 909:
Could humans always overcome their evil tendencies through
their own efforts?

Answer:
“Yes, and sometimes with very little effort; what they lack is
will power. How few of you make such an effort, however!”

Question 910:
Can humans find in spirits an effective aid to help them
overcome their passions?

Answer:
“If you sincerely pray to God and your guardian angel,
good spirits will certainly come to your aid – that is their
mission.” (See no. 459)

Question 911:
Aren’t there passions that are so alive and irresistible that the
will is powerless to overcome them?

Answer:
“There are many who say ‘I want to’, but their will is only
on their lips. They want, but they are very satisfied at not
being able to. When they believe they cannot overcome
their passions, it is because their spirit is pleased by them
as a result of its own impurity. Those who try to restrain
their passions understand their own spiritual nature, and
overcoming them is a triumph of the spirit over matter.”

Question 912:
What is the most effective means of fighting the predominance
of the corporeal nature?

Answer:
“Practicing self-denial.”