The Commemoration of the Dead. Funerals

Question 320:
Are spirits sensitive to being remembered by those who loved
them on earth?

Answer:
“Much more than you may suppose. Being remembered
adds to their happiness if they are already happy and
consoles them if they are despondent.”

Question 321:
Does Memorial Day hold a more solemn meaning for spirits?
Do they prepare to visit those who will pray over their graves?

Answer:
“Spirits answer to the call of thought on that day as on all
others.”

– Is it for them a meeting day at their gravesides?

“They assemble in greater numbers on that day because
the number of persons who call to them is larger, but each
one only pays attention to its friends and not the crowd of
indifferent people.”

– In what form do they come and what would they look like
if they could make themselves visible?

“They would look like they did while alive.”

Question 322:
Do forgotten spirits, whose graves are not visited by anyone,
come despite that fact and feel troubled at not seeing any
friends remembering them?

Answer:
“What is the earth to them? They are only linked to it by
the heart. If no one loves them any longer, there is nothing
that can make spirits feel connected to the earth. They
have the whole universe before them.”

Question 323:
Does a visit made to its grave provide more satisfaction to a
spirit than a prayer made on its behalf in someone’s home?

Answer:
“A visit to its grave is a way of showing that one is thinking
of the absent spirit – it is the exteriorization of the thought.
I have already told you that it is the prayer that blesses the
act of remembering. The place itself is of little importance
if the memory comes from the heart.”

Question 324:
Do the spirits of individuals who are to be honored with
statues or monuments attend the inaugurations and watch
them with pleasure?

Answer:
“Many watch them when they can, but they are less
sensitive to the honors paid to them than to the memories.”

Question 325:
Where does the desire come from where certain persons wish to
be buried in one place rather than in another? Do they return
to it with more satisfaction after death? And is the importance
given to a physical thing a sign of a spirit’s impure nature?

Answer:
“A spirit’s affection for certain places is a sign of moral
impurity. What does one piece of earth represent more
than another to an evolved spirit? Doesn’t it know that its
soul will be reunited with its loved ones, even though their
bones may be far apart?”

– Should gathering together the mortal remains of all the
members of a family be considered meaningless?

“No. It is a pious custom and a witness to the sympathy
of loved ones. If such gatherings mean little to spirits, they
are nonetheless useful to humans  – their memories are
better concentrated.”

Question 326:
Is a soul that has returned to life as a spirit sensitive to the
honors paid to its mortal remains?

Answer:
“When a spirit has already reached a certain degree of purification,
it has no more earthly vanity and it comprehends the futility of
all these things. Nevertheless, you should know that there are
spirits who, in the first moments of death, take great satisfaction
in the honors paid to them. Others become disturbed if they see
that their envelope is being forgotten, because they still hold on
to some of the prejudices of this world.”

Question 327:
Do spirits ever watch their own burial?

Answer:
“They frequently do, but sometimes they do not perceive
what is happening if they are still in the state of confusion.”

– Do they feel flattered by a large gathering at their burial?

“More so or less so, according to the sentiments of the
people gathered there.”

Question 328:
Does the spirit attend the meetings of its heirs?

Answer:
“Almost always. God wills it for its instruction and as
punishment for guilty ones. It is there that the spirit
judges what its heirs’ declarations of affection are really
worth. All sentiments become patent to the spirit, and the
disappointment it feels in seeing the greed of those who
divide up the spoils makes their true sentiments very clear;
however, their time shall also come.”

Question 329:
Is the instinctive respect of people for the dead in all times
and among all cultures the result of the intuition of a future
existence?

Answer:
“It is its natural consequence. Without it, such respect
would have no meaning.”