The Influence of the Organism

Question 367:
Upon joining the body, does a spirit identify itself with matter?

Answer:
“Matter is no more than the spirit’s envelope, as clothing
is the body’s envelope. Upon joining the body, a spirit
preserves the attributes of its spirit nature.”

Question 368:
Does a spirit exercise its faculties with full liberty after its
union with a body?

Answer:
“The exercise of its faculties depends on the organs
serving as their instruments. They are weakened by the
density of matter.”

– Then accordingly, would the material envelope be an
obstacle to the free manifestation of the spirit’s faculties, like
an opaque glass is an obstacle to the free emission of light?

“Yes, and exceedingly opaque.”

One may further compare the action of the body’s matter upon a
spirit to that of sludgy water, which hinders the free movement of
an object immersed in it.

Question 369:
Is the free exercise of the soul’s faculties subordinate to the
development of the bodily organs?

Answer:
“The organs are the instruments for the manifestation of the
soul’s faculties. This manifestation depends on the degree of
the respective organs’ development, just as the excellence of
a piece of work depends on the excellence of the tool.”

Question 370:
Could one infer from the influence of the organs a connection
between the development of the cerebral structure and the
moral and intellectual faculties?

Answer:
“Do not confuse the effect with the cause. The spirit
always possesses the faculties that are proper for it. Thus,
it is not the organs that give it its faculties, but rather the
faculties that stimulate the development of the organs.”

– According to this view, does the diversity of aptitudes among
individuals stem solely from the condition of their spirit?

“Solely is not the exact term. The qualities of the spirit,
who may be more advanced or less so, are the basis for
this diversity; however, we must take into account the
influence of matter because it hinders to a greater or lesser
degree the exercising of these faculties.”

When the spirit incarnates, it brings certain predispositions with it, and
if we accept the idea that there is a corresponding area in the brain for
each one of them, then the development of these areas will be seen as
an effect and not a cause. If the faculties had their origins in the organs
themselves, humans would be machines without free will and without
any responsibility for their actions. We would have to accept the fact
that the greatest geniuses – scientists, poets, artists – owe their talents to
chance, which has given them a special brain structure. Consequently,
without this structure, they would not be geniuses; the least simpleton
could have been a Newton, a Virgil or a Raphael if he had been
provided with a certain brain structure. This assumption becomes
even more absurd when applied to moral qualities. Thus, according to
this theory, if Saint Vincent de Paul had been gifted by nature with a
particular brain structure, he might have been a scoundrel, whereas the
greatest scoundrel would only lack a certain brain structure in order to
be someone like Saint Vincent de Paul. On the other hand, if we accept
the idea that such special structures, if they exist, are effects developed
by exercising the faculties – like the muscles by moving them – then
nothing seems unreasonable. Let us make a trivial comparison, albeit
a truthful one. By certain facial traits you recognize that a person is
addicted to alcohol. Do these traits make the person an alcoholic or is it
alcoholism that produces the traits? Therefore, one may safely state that
the organs receive the imprint of the faculties.