Occult Power, Talismans, Sorcerers

Question 551:
Can evil individuals, with the aid of evil spirits to whom they
are devoted, cause harm to their neighbor?

Answer:
“No, God would not permit it.”

Question 552:
What is to be thought of the belief that certain individuals
can cast spells?

Answer:
“Some persons possess a very strong magnetic power,
which they may use for evil if their own spirit is evil. In
that case, they could be aided by other evil spirits. But do
not believe in the fake magical power that exists only in
the imagination of superstitious people who are ignorant
of the true laws of nature. The events they cite are natural
events poorly observed, and above all, poorly understood.”

Question 553:
What may be the effect of formulas and practices with which
certain persons claim to control the wills of spirits?

Answer:
“That of making them look ridiculous if they are of good
faith; if not, they are rogues who deserve punishment.
All such formulas are mere charlatanism. There is no
sacramental word, no cabalistic sign, no talisman that has
any power over spirits, because they are only attracted by
thought and not by material objects.”

– Haven’t certain spirits sometimes dictated cabalistic formulas?

“Yes, there are spirits who indicate signs and bizarre words
to you, or who prescribe certain acts to you with the help
of those who aid you in performing what you call spellcasting. Nevertheless, you may be very sure that these
spirits are mocking you and abusing your credulity.”

Question 554:
Isn’t it possible that those who rightly or wrongly trust in what
they call the virtue of a talisman may attract a spirit by such
trust since it is their thought that acts, whereas the talisman is
only a sign that helps to direct the thought?

Answer:
“That is the case, but the nature of the spirit attracted by
such means depends on the purity of the intention and
the level of the sentiments. But it is rare for those who
are simple enough to believe in the virtue of a talisman
not to have a material objective rather than a moral one.
Whatever the case may be, this implies a narrowness
and weakness of mind that gives access to imperfect and
mocking spirits.”

Question 555:
What are sorcerers?

Answer:
“When they are of good faith, those whom you call
sorcerers are persons who possess certain faculties such
as magnetic power or second-sight. Since they do things
that you do not comprehend, you suppose them to be
endowed with supernatural power. Haven’t your learned
individuals often been mistaken for sorcerers in the eyes
of the ignorant?”

Spiritism and magnetism give us the key to an infinite number of
phenomena, about which ignorance has woven many fables and in
which the facts have been greatly exaggerated by the imagination.
A clear knowledge of these two sciences – which are actually but
one – showing the reality of things and their true cause is the best
protection against superstitious ideas because they reveal what is
possible and what is impossible, what is within the laws of nature,
and what is no more than a foolish belief.

Question 556:
Do certain individuals really possess the gift of healing by
simple touch?

Answer:
“Their magnetic power may act to that extent when it is
aided by purity of sentiments and an ardent desire to do
good, for then good spirits come to their aid. It is necessary,
however, to distrust the way stories are told by very gullible
or enthusiastic individuals, who are always ready to see the
miraculous in the simplest and most natural things. One
must always distrust the self-interested claims of persons
who exploit credulity for their own profit.”