
A Theoretical Summary of Somnambulism, Ecstasy and Second Sight

Question 455:
The phenomena of natural somnambulism are produced
spontaneously and independently of any known external
cause, but among some persons gifted with a special
physical organization they may be induced through the
action of the magnetic agent.

The state called magnetic somnambulism is no different
than natural somnambulism except that it is artificially
produced, whereas the other is spontaneous.

Natural somnambulism is a widely known occurrence and
no one questions its reality, despite the marvelous character
of its phenomena. So, why would magnetic somnambulism
be any more extraordinary or irrational simply because of
the fact that it is produced artificially like so many other
things? It is said that charlatans have exploited it – one
more reason for it not to be left in their hands. Once
science finally takes full possession of it, charlatanism will
have much less credit among the masses. Meanwhile, since
both natural and artificial somnambulism are a fact – there
is no arguing against fact – they are establishing themselves
in spite of the ill will of some. This is occurring even in the
realm of science, where it is entering through a multitude
of side doors instead of through the front. And when it is
fully established there, it will be necessary to grant it the
right of citizenship.

For Spiritism, somnambulism is more than a physiological
phenomenon; it is a light projected onto psychology. It
is during somnambulism that the soul can be studied
because that is when the soul appears uncovered. One of
the phenomena that characterize the soul is clairvoyance
independent of the ordinary organs of sight. Those who
contest this fact do so on the grounds that somnambulists
do not see at all times and at the will of the experimenter,
as they do with their eyes. Should we be surprised that
the means being different, the effects are not the same?
Would it be rational to seek identical effects when the
instruments differ? The soul has its properties just as the
eyes have theirs, and it is necessary to judge them in their
own right and not by analogy.

The cause of clairvoyance in the magnetic somnambulist and
natural somnambulist is identical: an attribute of the soul, a
faculty inherent in every part of the incorporeal being existing
within us, and having no limits beyond those assigned to the
soul itself. Somnambulists can see every place where their
soul can go, whatever the distance may be.

In the case of remote viewing, somnambulists do not see
things from the place where their body is, as if they were
looking through a telescope. They see them as present, as
though they were actually at the place where those things
exist, because, in reality, their soul is actually there. That
is why their body seems non-existent and deprived of
sensations until the moment in which the soul retakes
possession of it. This partial separation of soul and body
is an abnormal state that may last for a short or long
time, but not indefinitely. This separation is what causes
the fatigue that the body experiences after a certain time,
especially when the soul is involved in some active pursuit.

Soul sight or spirit sight is not circumscribed and has no
determined seat, which explains why somnambulists cannot
assign one particular organ to it. They see because they see
without knowing why or how; as spirits, sight for them does
not have a specific site in the body. When they do refer to
their body, sight seems to occur in the centers where the vital
activity is greatest, especially in the brain, in the stomach area
or in the organ which for them is the most intense point of
connection between the spirit and the body.

The power of somnambulistic lucidity is not unlimited,
however. Even when completely free, spirits are limited
in their faculties and knowledge according to the degree
of purification they have reached  – even more so than
when attached to and under the influence of matter. This
is the reason why somnambulistic clairvoyance is neither
universal nor infallible. Its infallibility should be relied on
even less the more it is diverted from the purpose proposed
by nature in order to be transformed into an object of
curiosity and experimentation.

When the spirit of the somnambulist finds itself in the state of
disengagement, it enters into communication more easily with
other incarnate or discarnate spirits. This communication is
established through the mutual contact of the fluids comprising
their perispirits and enabling the transmission of thought,
like an electric wire. Somnambulists, therefore, do not need
thoughts to be articulated through words. Instead, they sense
and divine them, rendering them eminently impressionable and
accessible to the influences of the mental atmosphere around
them. That is also why a large group of spectators – especially
of on-lookers who are more or less ill-willed – essentially harms
the development of their faculties, which close themselves off,
so to speak, and do not unfold with full liberty as they would
in more intimate or sympathetic surroundings. The presence of
ill-willed or antipathetic persons produces an effect on them similar
to when a hand touches a sensitive plant.51

Somnambulists see their own spirit and body at the same
time. They are, so to speak, two beings that represent a
double existence – spiritual and corporeal – blended together
by the ties that unite them. Somnambulists do not always
comprehend this situation, and such duality frequently makes
them speak of themselves as though they were speaking of a
stranger. What happens is that, in one moment, the corporeal
being speaks to the spirit being, and in the next moment, it is
the spirit being that speaks to the corporeal.

The spirit acquires an increase of knowledge and
experience during each one of its corporeal existences. It
partially forgets them during its reincarnation in dense
matter, but it remembers them as a spirit. That is how
certain somnambulists display knowledge superior to their
degree of education and even superior to their apparent
intellectual capacity. The possible intellectual and scientific
underdevelopment of somnambulists in the waking state,
however, does not allow one to prejudge anything about
the knowledge they may reveal in the lucid state. According
to the circumstances and objective they have in view, they
may draw this knowledge from their own experience, from
their clairvoyance of current events, or from the counsels
they receive from other spirits. However, the accuracy
with which they describe things depends on the degree of
their spirit’s evolution.

Through the phenomena of somnambulism, whether
natural or magnetically induced, Providence furnishes us
undeniable evidence of the existence and independence of
the soul, and enables us to witness the sublime spectacle of its
emancipation. Moreover, through these phenomena it opens
to us the book of our destiny. When somnambulists describe
what is occurring at a distance, it is obvious that they really
are seeing it, but not through the eyes of their body. They
see themselves at that place after having been transported to
it. There is something of themselves present there, and since
that something is not their body, it can only be their soul or
spirit. While humans get lost in the subtleties of an abstract
and unintelligible metaphysics in pursuit of the causes of
our mental existence, God routinely places in front of them
and within reach the simplest and most patent means for the
study of experimental psychology.

Ecstasy is the state in which the independence between the
soul and body is expressed in the most sensitive way, and
even becomes somewhat palpable.

In both dreams and somnambulism, the soul wanders through
terrestrial worlds, whereas in ecstasy, it enters an unknown
world, that of ethereal spirits, with whom it communicates,
without, however, overstepping certain bounds – if it did, the
soul would completely break the ties connecting it to the body.
A resplendent and entirely new brilliance surrounds this soul.
Harmonies unknown on earth enrapture it, an indefinable
well-being permeates it, the spirit enjoys a foretaste of celestial
beatitude, and it may be said that it has set one foot on the
threshold of eternity.

In the state of ecstasy, the nullification of the body is
almost complete. It only maintains organic life per se and
it feels that the soul is connected to it by only a single
thread, which with any further effort would break forever.

In this state, all earthly thoughts disappear in order to give
way to the pure sentiment that is the very essence of our
immaterial being. Entirely enraptured by that sublime
contemplation, ecstatics regard life as a momentary pause.
For them, good and evil, and the crude joys and hardships
of this world are no more than the futile incidents of a
journey of which they feel happy to see the end.

The same thing happens with ecstatics as with somnambulists:
their lucidity may be more purified or less so, and how fully
they comprehend things depends on the degree to which
their spirit has evolved. At times, there is more exaltation
than true lucidity among ecstatics, or rather, their exaltation
impairs their lucidity. That is why their revelations are
frequently a mixture of truths and errors, of sublime and
absurd – even ridiculous – things. Imperfect spirits often take
advantage of this exaltation – always a source of frailty – in
order to dominate the ecstatic who does not know how to
master it. To do so, these spirits produce appearances that will
keep the ecstatic attached to the ideas and prejudices of his
or her waking state. This is an obstacle, but not all cases are
similar. It is our responsibility to coolly judge and weigh their
revelations in the balance of reason.

The emancipation of the soul sometimes even manifests
in the waking state and produces the phenomenon called
second sight, which gives to those possessing it the faculty
of seeing, hearing and feeling beyond the limits of their
normal senses. They perceive things at distance wherever
their soul may extend its action, and they see, so to speak,
through their ordinary sight, as a type of mirage.

At the moment in which the phenomenon of second sight
is produced, the physical state is considerably modified:
the eyes become somewhat hazy, looking without seeing,
and the whole physiognomy reflects a type of exaltation. It
is obvious that the organs of sight are not involved in this
phenomenon, because the vision has been seen to persist
even with the eyes shut.

This faculty seems as natural as that of normal sight for
those who possess it. They consider it a normal attribute
of their being and it does not seem exceptional to them.
Generally, forgetfulness follows this temporary lucidity,
the remembrance of which becomes more and more
vague, finally disappearing like a dream.

The power of second sight ranges from a confused
sensation to a clear and distinct perception of things
present or absent. In its rudimentary state, it gives to
some individuals tact, astuteness and a kind of sureness
in their actions, which may manifest itself as an ability to
evaluate, on first contact, another person’s moral standing.
When this second sight is more developed, it awakens
presentiments, and when developed even further, it
shows events that have already happened or that are in
the process of happening.

Natural and artificial somnambulism, ecstasy and second
sight are no more than varieties or modifications of effects
arising from the same cause. Like dreams, such phenomena
belong to the natural order, and that is why they have
existed throughout time. History shows us that they have
been known about and even exploited since remotest
antiquity and in them may be found the explanation of
an infinite number of events that preconceived ideas have
regarded as supernatural.
