Dissatisfaction with Life. Suicide

Question 943:
Where does the dissatisfaction with life come from, which
takes hold of some individuals without any plausible reason?

Answer:
“It is the effect of idleness, lack of faith, and usually, satiety.
For those who employ their faculties with a useful purpose
and according to their natural aptitudes, labor has nothing
barren about it and life flows by more quickly. They bear
life’s tribulations with patience and resignation because
they look forward to the more solid and lasting happiness
awaiting them.”

Question 944:
Do people have the right to take their own life?

Answer:
“No! Only God has that right. Those who intentionally
commit suicide commit a transgression against this law.”

– Is suicide always intentional?

“Insane individuals who kill themselves do not know what
they are doing.”

Question 945:
What is to be thought of those who commit suicide because
they are dissatisfied with life?

Answer:
“Folly! Why didn’t they work? Life would not have seemed
so heavy to them.”

Question 946:
What about those who resort to suicide in order to escape from
the troubles and disappointments of this world?

Answer:
“Poor spirits, who do not have the courage to bear the
misfortunes of life! God helps those who suffer but
not those who have neither strength nor courage. The
tribulations of life are meant as trials or expiations. Happy
are they who bear them without complaining, for they
shall be rewarded! But woe to those who in their impiety
hope to find salvation in chance! Chance or luck  – to
borrow their own language – may in fact favor them for
a moment, but only to make them later and more cruelly
feel the emptiness of their words.”

– Won’t those who have driven an unhappy person to this act
of despair suffer the consequences of their action?

“Unfortunate beings! They will have to answer for it as for
a murder.”

Question 947:
Can those who have become disheartened with necessity and
who allow themselves to die of despair be considered as having
committed suicide?

“It is suicide, but those who have caused it, or those who
could have prevented it, are guiltier than those for whom
clemency awaits. However, do not think they will be entirely
absolved if they lacked firmness and perseverance, or failed
to make the best use of their intelligence to get themselves
out of their difficulties. They will be even more unfortunate
if their despair was the child of pride; i.e., if they were
one of those whose pride paralyzes their intelligence, who
would be ashamed at having to earn their living by manual
labor, and who would prefer to die of starvation rather
than descend from what they call their social position!
Isn’t there a hundred times more greatness and dignity in
struggling against adversity, in braving the criticism of a
futile and selfish society, which only shows goodwill toward
those who lack nothing, and which turns its back on you
in your time of need? To throw away one’s life because of
the considerations of such a society is a stupid thing since
society will not care about it in the least.”

Question 948:
Is suicide committed in order to escape the shame of an evil act
as reprehensible as suicide committed out of despair?

Answer:
“Suicide does not erase the wrong. On the contrary, it is a
second wrong added to the first. Those who have the courage
to do evil should have the courage to bear the consequences.
God is the one who judges. Moreover, depending on the
cause, God can at times lessen its punishment.”

Question 949:
Is suicide excusable when committed in order to avoid
bringing shame on one’s children or family?

Answer:
“Those who act under this belief do no good at all;
however, they think they do, and God will take their
intention into account, for their suicide will be a self
imposed expiation. The wrong is mitigated by their
intention, but it is a wrong nonetheless. Besides, if you
would get rid of your social prejudices and abuses, you
would not have any more suicides.”

Those who take their own life in order to escape the shame of
an evil act prove that they attach more value to the estimation of
others than to that of God, because they will return to the spirit life
burdened with their iniquities and will have deprived themselves
of the means of atoning for them during life. God is often less
unforgiving than people. God pardons those who sincerely repent
and takes into account our efforts at reparation; however, suicide
does not repair anything.

Question 950:
What is to be thought of those who take their own life in the
hope of arriving sooner at a better life?

Answer:
“Another folly! Let them do good and they will be surer
to reach such a state. Their suicide will only delay their
entrance into a better world and they themselves will ask to
come back in order to complete the life that they cut short
through a wrong-headed idea. A wrong, no matter what it
may be, never opens the sanctuary of the elect to anyone.”

Question 951:
Isn’t the sacrifice of one’s life sometimes meritorious when it is made
in order to save the lives of others or to be useful to one’s neighbor?

Answer:
“In accordance with such intention, it is sublime, and such
a sacrifice of life is therefore not a suicide. However, God
opposes a meaningless sacrifice and cannot look upon it
with pleasure if it is tarnished by pride. A sacrifice is not
meritorious unless it is selfless. Unfortunately, those who
make such a sacrifice sometimes have ulterior motives, and
this decreases its value in God’s sight.”

Every sacrifice made at the cost of our own happiness is a supremely
meritorious act in God’s sight, for it is the practice of the law of
charity. Additionally, since life is the earthly asset that we value the
most, those who renounce it for the good of their neighbor do not
commit a crime: they perform a sacrifice. Nonetheless, before doing
so, they should consider whether their life might not be more useful
than their death.

Question 952:
Is it considered suicide for those who die as victims of the
abuse of their own passions, which they knew would hasten
their end, but which they could no longer resist because habit
turned their passions into true physical needs?

Answer:
“It is a moral suicide. Don’t you see that they are doubly
guilty in such a case? They lack courage and yield to
brutishness. Moreover, they forget about God.”

– Are they more or less guilty than those who shorten their life
out of despair?

“They are guiltier because they had time to reason about
their suicide. For those who commit suicide on the spur
of the moment, there is sometimes a kind of delirium that
approaches insanity. The former will be punished much
more than the latter because punishments are always in
proportion to the awareness of one’s wrong-doing.”

Question 953:
When individuals see an inevitable and terrible death in
front of them, is it wrong to shorten their suffering by a few
moments through intentional death?

Answer:
“It is always wrong not to wait for the term set by God.
Besides, how can they tell with certainty whether their time
has indeed come – despite appearances – or whether they
might receive some unexpected help at the last moment?”

– We admit that suicide is reprehensible under ordinary
circumstances, but we are supposing a case in which death is
inevitable, and in which life is only shortened by a few instants.

“Nevertheless, it displays a lack of resignation and of
submission to the will of the Creator.”

– What in this case are the consequences of such action?

“As always, an expiation in proportion to the seriousness
of the wrong, according to the circumstances.”

Question 954:
Is an imprudent act that compromises life without necessity
reprehensible?

Answer:
“There is no culpability when there is no positive intention
or consciousness of doing harm.”

Question 955:
Are the women who in some countries intentionally burn
themselves to death over the body of their husband to be
considered as having committed suicide, and must they suffer
the consequences of it?

Answer:
“They obey a prejudice, and usually do it more out of
coercion than of their own will. They believe they are
fulfilling a duty, and this is not what characterizes suicide.
Their excuse is their ignorance and their lack of moral
development. Such barbarous and stupid customs will
disappear with civilization.”

Question 956:
Do those who cannot bear the loss of loved ones and kill themselves
in the hope of rejoining them accomplish their objective?

Answer:
“The result for them is much different than what they
hoped for. Instead of being reunited with the objects of their
affection, they keep themselves away from them even longer
because God cannot reward an act of cowardice, an insult
which demonstrates distrust in divine providence. They will
pay for that moment of insanity with afflictions even greater
than those they wished to shorten, and they will not have
the compensation they had hoped for.” (See nos. 934 ff.)

Question 957:
In general, what are the consequences of suicide on the state of
the spirit?

Answer:
“The consequences of suicide vary widely. There are no
set penalties and in all cases they are always relative to
the causes that produced them. One consequence, from
which those who commit suicide cannot escape, however,
is disappointment. Besides, the fate is not the same for all –
it depends on circumstances. Some expiate their wrong at
once, whereas others do so in a new life that will be worse
than the one whose course they have interrupted.”

Observation has in fact confirmed that the consequences of suicide
are not always the same. However, there are some that are a common
thread to all cases of violent death and the aftermath of the sudden
interruption of life. Foremost among them is the persistence of the
link that ties the spirit to the body and which is almost always at
its full strength when prematurely ruptured – unlike natural death
wherein this link weakens gradually and is often undone before life
is completely extinguished. The consequences of these unfortunate
events are the prolongation of spiritual confusion followed by the
illusion which, for a longer or shorter period, causes the spirit to
believe it is still among the living. (See nos. 155, 165)

In some suicides, the affinity that persists between the spirit and the
body produces a sort of repercussion of the state of the body on the
spirit, who is thus compelled to witness the effects of decomposition,
experiencing a sensation full of anguish and horror. This state can
continue as long as the life which was interrupted ought to have
lasted. This consequence is not the general rule. However, in no case
are those who committed suicide freed from the consequences of their
lack of courage; sooner or later, they will expiate this wrong in one
way or another. Thus, certain spirits who had been very unhappy on
earth have stated that they had committed suicide in their preceding
existence, and that they had voluntarily submitted to new trials in
order to try to bear them with more resignation. For some it comes
in the form of a bond to matter, from which they vainly seek to free
themselves in order to go to happier worlds, but whose access is denied
to them. For the majority, it is regret for having done something
needless from which they have reaped only disappointment.

Religion, morality and philosophy condemn suicide as being
contrary to the law of nature. All tell us, in principle, that we have
no right to intentionally shorten our own life. But why don’t we have
that right? Why aren’t we free to put an end to our own sufferings?
It is up to the Spiritist Doctrine to address these questions and to
show through the actual examples of those who have succumbed
to it that suicide is not only a wrong that violates moral law (a
consideration of little importance to some individuals), but a
reckless act that will bring no benefit – in fact, the result will be
quite the contrary. It is not according to some theory that Spiritism
teaches us this. Spiritism has set actual examples right in front of us.
