Voluntary Privations. Mortifications

Question 718:
Does the law of self-preservation oblige us to provide for our
own physical needs?

Answer:
“Yes, because without energy and health, labor is
impossible.”

Question 719:
Are we culpable if we seek our own well-being?

Answer:
“Well-being is a natural desire. God only prohibits abuse
because it is contrary to self-preservation. God does not
consider it a crime for you to seek your own well-being
if it is not gained at another’s expense and if it does not
weaken either your moral or physical strength.”

Question 720:
Do voluntary privations that have an equally voluntary
expiation as their purpose have any merit in God’s sight?

Answer:
“Do good to others and you will have greater merit.”

– Are there any meritorious voluntary privations?

“Yes, the privation of meaningless pleasures, because it
frees you from matter and elevates your soul. Merit means
resisting the temptation that drives you to excess and the
taste for useless things, and it means taking from your own
necessities in order to give to those in need. If privation is
nothing more than pretense, it is only a mockery.”

Question 721:
A life of mortifications through asceticism has been practiced
since ancient times and among different cultures. Is it
meritorious from any point of view?

Answer:
“Ask for whom it is useful and you will have your answer.
If it only serves the one who practices it and if it hinders
him or her from doing good to others, it is selfish,
whatever may be the pretext under which it is disguised.
Submitting oneself to privation by working for others is
true mortification and is in accord with Christian charity.”

Question 722:
Is the abstention from certain foods prescribed among various
cultures based on reason?

Answer:
“Everything that humans can eat without harming their
health is permitted. Lawmakers, however, have prohibited
certain foods with a useful end in mind, and in order to
give greater weight to their laws, they have represented
them as having come from God.”

Question 723:
Is humankind’s use of animals as food contrary to the law of nature?

Answer:
“With your present physical constitution, flesh nourishes
flesh; otherwise, humans would perish. The law of self
­preservation imposes on you the duty to preserve your
energies and health so that you may fulfill the law of labor.
You should therefore eat according to the requirements of
your own physical organization.”

Question 724:
Is the abstention from foods  – animal or otherwise  –
meritorious as an expiation?

Answer:
“Yes, if you deprive yourselves for the sake of others; but
God cannot see mortification when there is no serious and
useful privation. This is why we say that those who only
seem to deprive themselves are hypocrites.” (See no. 720)

Question 725:
What are we to think of the mutilations practiced on the body
of humans or animals?

Answer:
“What is the point of such a question? Always ask whether
a thing is useful. What is useless cannot be pleasing to
God and what is harmful is always displeasing. You can
be very sure that God is sensitive only to sentiments that
raise the soul toward God. It is by practicing the divine
laws instead of violating them that you can shake off the
burden of your terrestrial matter.”

Question 726:
If the sufferings of this world enable us to evolve – depending
on the manner in which we bear them – may we also evolve
through sufferings that we create intentionally?

Answer:
“Natural sufferings are the only ones that enable you to
evolve because they come from God. Intentional sufferings
serve no purpose when they have no value for the good of
others. Do you believe that those who shorten their lives
through superhuman hardships – the bonzes, fakirs, and a
few fanatics of various sects – progress on their path? Why
don’t they labor for the good of their neighbors instead? Let
them visit the indigent, comfort those who mourn, work
for those who are infirm, and endure privations to help
the unfortunate; then their life will be useful and pleasing
to God. When you only have yourselves in mind in the
intentional hardships to which you subject yourselves, it is
selfishness; when you suffer for others, it is the practice of
charity. Such are the precepts of Christ.”

Question 727:
Since we should not create intentional sufferings for
ourselves that are of no use to others, should we nevertheless
protect ourselves from those that we foresee or from those that
threaten us?

Answer:
“The self-preservation instinct has been given to all beings
against dangers and sufferings. Whip your spirit and not
your body; mortify your pride and stifle your selfishness –
that serpent devouring your heart – and you will do more
for your progress than through self-inflictions that no
longer have a place in this day and age.”