The Necessity of Labor

Question 674:
Is the necessity of labor a law of nature?

Answer:
“Labor is a law of nature, and as such is a necessity per
se. Because civilization both increases peoples’ needs and
their enjoyments, it obliges them to work more.”

Question 675:
Should we understand labor to entail only material
occupations?

Answer:
“No; the spirit labors as much as the body. Every useful
occupation is labor.”

Question 676:
Why has labor been imposed on humankind?

Answer:
“It is a consequence of their corporeal nature. It is a means
of expiation and at the same time a means of perfecting
their intelligence. Without labor, humans would remain in
intellectual infancy. Thus, they must owe their food, safety and
well-being to their own labor and activity. God has granted
more intelligence to certain persons in order to compensate for
their physical weakness, but labor is involved nonetheless.”

Question 677:
Why does nature itself provide for all the needs of the animals?

Answer:
“Everything in nature labors. Animals labor as you do,
but their work, like their intelligence, is limited to their
self-­preservation. That is why labor does not lead to
progress among them, while among human beings it has
a double objective: the preservation of the body and the
development of thought. The latter is also a necessity
and raises them above themselves. When I say that the
labor of animals is limited to self-preservation, I mean the
objective toward which their labor is aimed. But while
devoted entirely to providing for their physical needs, they
are also unknowingly agents collaborating in the designs
of the Creator. Their labor plays no less of a part in the
final objective of nature, although you often do not see its
immediate result.”

Question 678:
On more highly evolved worlds, are humans subjected to the
same necessity of labor?

Answer:
“The nature of the labor is relative to that of the needs;
the fewer the material needs, the less material the labor.
Yet, you must not assume that humans on such worlds
remain inactive and useless; idleness would be a torture
instead of a benefit.”

Question 679:
Are those who possess plenty of assets to ensure their welfare
exempted from the law of labor?

Answer:
“From physical labor, perhaps, but not from the obligation
to render themselves useful according to their means and
to perfect their own and others’ intelligence; this too is
labor. If those to whom God has granted enough assets
to ensure their welfare are not obligated to eat their bread
from the sweat of their brow, their obligation to be useful
to their fellow creatures is all the greater. It is a portion
they have received in advance, allowing them more free
time to do good.”

Question 680:
Aren’t there those who are incapable of working at anything at
all and whose existence serves no purpose?

Answer:
“God is just and only condemns those who intentionally live
a life that serves no purpose because they live by depending on
other peoples’ work. God desires for all to make themselves
useful according to their own faculties.” (See no. 643)

Question 681:
Does the law of nature impose upon children the obligation to
work for their parents?

Answer:
“Certainly, just as parents must work for their children.
That is why God has made filial love and parental love
natural sentiments so that by such mutual love the
members of the same family may be led to help each other.
This is frequently not recognized in your present society.”
(See no. 205)