Foreknowledge of the Future

Question 868:
Can the future be revealed to humans?

Answer:
“In principle, the future is hidden from them and only
in rare and exceptional cases does God permit it to be
revealed.”

Question 869:
For what purpose is the future hidden from them?

Answer:
“If they knew the future, they would neglect the present and
they would not act with the same freedom, because they
would be dominated by the thought that if a certain thing
must happen it is no use being concerned about it; otherwise,
they would try to prevent it. God has willed it to be this way
so that each one may contribute to the accomplishment of
things, even those that he or she would like to thwart. Thus, it is
that you yourselves unknowingly prepare the events that will
occur over the course of your lives.”

Question 870:
But if it is useful for the future to remain hidden, why does
God sometimes allow it to be revealed?

Answer:
“This happens if a particular foreseen event would facilitate
the accomplishment of things instead of preventing them,
and if it leads individuals to act differently than they would
have if the revelation had not been made. Besides, many
times it is a trial. The anticipation of an event may awaken
thoughts that are more virtuous or less so. For instance,
if a man knows that he will receive a fortune that he had
not expected, he may be taken by the sentiment of greed
or elation about the probability of adding to his earthly
pleasures. In order to obtain the fortune sooner, he may
then desire the death of the one who is to leave it to him.
On the other hand, perhaps such anticipation will awaken
good sentiments and generous thoughts in him. If the
prediction is not fulfilled, it will be another trial: the way
in which he bears the disappointment; nonetheless, he will
have acquired the merit or the blame for the good or bad
thoughts that the prediction aroused in him.”

Question 871:
Since God knows everything, God knows whether a person will
or will not fail in a particular trial. If that is the case, what is the
need of the trial in the first place, since it cannot add anything to
what God does not already know about that person?

Answer:
“You might as well ask why God did not create human
beings perfect and accomplished to begin with (see no. 119)
or why they must pass through childhood before arriving
at adulthood (see no. 379). The purpose of a trial is not
to enlighten God about what people deserve – God knows
perfectly well what they deserve – but to leave them the
entire responsibility for their own conduct since they have
the freedom to do or not do. Since they can choose between
good and evil, a trial has the purpose of placing them before
the temptation of evil, leaving them all the merit for resisting
it. Also, even though God knows very well beforehand
whether they will triumph or fail, out of divine justice God
can neither punish them nor reward them for an act they
have not yet committed.” (See no. 258)

It is the same among humans. However capable aspirants may
be and no matter how certain they are of success, they cannot be
granted any diploma without first being tested, i.e. without trial. In
the same way, a judge does not condemn the accused except with
proof that a crime was actually committed and not by the prediction
that the accused can or might commit such act in the future.

The more we reflect on the consequences that the knowledge of
the future would have for humans, the more we see how wise
Providence was to conceal it. The certainty of a happy event would
result in inaction; an unpleasant event, in discouragement; in
either case, our efforts would be paralyzed. This is why the future
is not shown to humans except as a goal they must reach through
their own efforts, but without knowing the tribulations they must
go through in order to reach it. Knowing about all the incidents
they might encounter along the way would deprive them of their
initiative and the use of their free will. They would let themselves be
dragged down the fatal slope of events without exercising their own
faculties. When the success of a matter is assured, no one is worried
about it any longer.