Occupations and Missions of Spirits

Question 558:
Do spirits have any other duty besides their own personal
improvement?

Answer:
“They concur in the harmony of the universe and act as
ministers in fulfilling God’s will. Spirit life is a continuous
occupation, but it is not at all arduous like that of earth,
because it is not subject to bodily fatigue or the anguish
of need.”

Question 559:
Do less evolved spirits also perform a useful role in the universe?

Answer:
“All have duties to fulfill. Doesn’t the least of masons
concur in the construction of a building as much as the
does the architect?” (See no. 540)

Question 560:
Does each spirit have special attributes?

Answer:
“It is worth stating that we all must inhabit all places
and must acquire knowledge of all things, successively
presiding over functions involving all the planes of the
universe. However, as Ecclesiastes states, there is a time
for everything. Thus, one spirit is currently fulfilling its
destiny on this world, while another will accomplish or
has already accomplished its destiny at another time, on
the earth, in the water, in the air, etc.”

Question 561:
Are the functions that spirits perform in the order of things
permanent for each spirit, and do such functions belong
exclusively to the attributes of certain orders?

Answer:
“All spirits must ascend the various degrees of the scale in
order to perfect themselves. Since God is just, God could
not have given knowledge without effort to some, while
others acquired it only in a painful manner.”

Likewise, among humans, no one reaches the supreme degree of
skill in any art without having acquired the necessary knowledge by
practicing the most elementary functions of that art.

Question 562:
Since spirits of the most advanced order have nothing more to
acquire, are they in a state of absolute repose, or do they still
have occupations?

Answer:
“What do you think they are doing for all eternity? Eternal
idleness would be eternal torture.”

– What is the nature of their occupations?

“Receiving orders directly from God, transmitting them
throughout the universe and supervising their execution.”

Question 563:
Are the occupations of spirits unceasing?

Answer:
“Unceasing, yes, if we understand that their thought is
always active, for they live by thought. Yet, one must not
equate their occupations with the material occupations of
humans. Their very activity is a delight because they know
they are being useful.”

– That is understandable for good spirits, but does the same
apply to less evolved ones?

“Less evolved spirits have occupations suitable for
their nature. Would you entrust the works of cultured
individuals to manual laborers?”

Question 564:
Are there among spirits those who are idle, or who do not
occupy themselves with anything useful?

Answer:
“Yes, but it is temporary and depends on the development
of their intelligence. Certainly, as among humans, there
are those who live only for themselves. Such idleness
nonetheless weighs on them, and sooner or later the desire
to progress stirs the need for activity, and they are glad
to make themselves useful once again. We are speaking
of spirits who have arrived at the necessary point of selfconsciousness and free will, for at their origin they are like
new-born children who act more from instinct than from
a determined will.”

Question 565:
Do spirits examine our works of art and take an interest in them?

Answer:
“They examine anything that may indicate the elevation
of spirits and their progress.”

Question 566:
Does a spirit who had a specialty on earth – a painter or
architect, for example – take a special interest in the works
that were the object of its predilection during life?

Answer:
“Everything blends into an overall objective. If the spirit
is good, it will take an interest in them to the degree that
they enable it to help with the evolution of souls toward
God. Besides, you are forgetting that spirits who practiced
an art during the lifetime in which you knew them could
have practiced another in a previous lifetime, because
it is necessary for them to know everything in order to
perfect themselves. Thus, according to their degree of
advancement, it might be that nothing constitutes a
specialty for them. This is what I meant when I stated
that everything blends into an overall objective. Also, be
aware of this: what is sublime to you in your backward
world is no more than child’s play when compared with

what exists on more advanced worlds. Why would you
suppose that the spirits who inhabit those worlds, where
there are arts unknown to you, would admire what would
appear to them as no more than the work of a school
child? As I have already stated: they examine whatever
may indicate progress.”

– We understand why such must be the case with highly
advanced spirits, but we are speaking about more commonplace
spirits who have not yet raised themselves above earthly ideas.

“Their case is different. Their point of view is more limited
and they may admire what you yourselves admire.”

Question 567:
Do spirits sometimes meddle in our occupations and pleasures?

Answer:
“Commonplace spirits, as you call them, yes. They are
unceasingly around you and at times take a very active
part in all that you do, according to their nature. It is
good that they do so in order to drive men and women
forward in their different walks of life, exciting or
moderating their passions.”

Spirits occupy themselves with the things of this world according
to whether they are more evolved or less so. High order spirits
undoubtedly have the ability to consider them in minutest detail,
but they only do so to the degree that it is useful to progress. Low
order spirits only attach an importance to such things in proportion
to the remembrances that are still present in their memory, and to
material ideas that are not yet extinct.

Question 568:
Do spirits who have missions to fulfill do so while in the errant
or incarnate state?

Answer:
“They may do so in either state. For certain errant spirits,
it is a great occupation.”

Question 569:
What do the missions that may be entrusted to errant spirits
entail?

“They are so varied that it would be impossible to describe
them. Besides, there are those that you would not be able
to comprehend. Spirits fulfill the will of God, and you are
not able to grasp all the divine designs.”

Spirits’ missions always have the good as their purpose. Whether as
a spirit or as a human, they are in charge of helping the progress of
humankind, nations or individuals within a varying range of ideas
that may be more specialized or less so in order to prepare the way
for certain events and to oversee the accomplishment of certain
things. Some have more restricted missions of a certain personal
or entirely localized manner, such as helping the sick, the dying
and the afflicted, and as guides, watching over those who are under
their protection and directing them with their counsels or the good
thoughts they suggest. One could say that there are as many kinds of
missions as there are kinds of interests to watch over, whether in the
material realm or in the moral realm. A spirit advances according to
how well it has performed its duty.

Question 570:
Do spirits always comprehend the designs that they are charged
with executing?

Answer:
“No. There are those who are blind instruments, while
others know fully well the purpose for which they act.”

Question 571:
Are advanced spirits the only ones who have missions to fulfill?

Answer:
“A mission’s importance is in relation to the spirit’s ability
and elevation. The courier who carries a dispatch also
fulfills a mission, though it is not that of a general.”

Question 572:
Is the mission of a spirit imposed on it or does it depend on
its will?

Answer:
“A spirit asks for it and is happy to receive it.”

– May the same mission be requested by several spirits?

“Yes, there are always several candidates but not all are
accepted.”

Question 573:
What does the mission of incarnate spirits entail?

Answer:
“Instructing human beings, helping them to advance,
and improving their institutions by direct and material
means. Missions are of various degrees of generality and
importance, however: the one who cultivates the soil
fulfills a mission as surely as the one who rules or teaches.
Everything in nature is linked together. At the same time
in which a spirit is purifying itself through incarnation, it
is also working to fulfill the designs of Providence. Each
one has its mission in this world because each one can be
useful for something.”

Question 574:
What could be the earthly mission of intentionally useless persons?

Answer:
“There really are persons who live only for themselves and who
do not know how to make themselves useful for anything.
They are poor beings whom we should pity because they
will painfully expiate their intentional uselessness, and their
chastisement frequently begins even in this world through
weariness and dissatisfaction with life.”

– Since they had the right to choose, why did they prefer a life
that could not be of any use to them?

“Among spirits there are lazy ones who recoil before a life
of work. God allows them to do so. They will understand
the inappropriateness of their uselessness later and at their
own expense, and they will be the first to ask to make
up for lost time. Also, they had perhaps chosen a more
useful life to begin with, but once in action, they rejected
it, allowing themselves to be misled by the suggestions of
spirits who incited them to idleness.”

Question 575:
Common occupations would seem to be duties rather than
missions per se. According to the idea normally associated
with the word, a mission has a sense of importance that is
less exclusive, and especially, less personal. From that point of
view, how can we tell if persons have a real mission on earth?

“By the great things they do and by the progress they
enable their fellow beings to make.”

Question 576:
Are those who have an important mission predestined for it
before their birth, and do they have knowledge of it?

Answer:
“Yes, sometimes, but more often they are unaware of it.
They only have a vague notion of it when they arrive on
the earth. Their mission is traced out after their birth and
according to circumstances as God drives them along the
path on which they must fulfill the divine designs.”

Question 577:
When individuals do something useful, is it always in virtue
of a previous and predestined mission, or might they have
received an unforeseen mission?

Answer:
“Not everything that individuals do is the consequence
of a predestined mission. Instead, they are frequently the
instrument a spirit uses in order to perform something
it considers useful. For example, a certain spirit thinks
it would be a good idea to write a book, which it would
actually write if it were incarnate, so it seeks out the
writer most capable of comprehending its thought
and most capable of acting on it. It suggests the idea
and directs its execution. Thus, this indi­vidual did not
originally come to earth with the mission of doing this
particular work. The same thing applies to certain works
of art and discoveries. It should be further noted that
during its body’s sleep, the incarnate spirit communicates
directly with the discarnate one in order to discuss how
the mission is to be carried out.”

Question 578:
Can a spirit fail in its mission through its own fault?

Answer:
“Yes, if it is not a high order spirit.”

– What are the consequences for it?

“It will have to start the work over – that is its punishment.
Furthermore, it will suffer the consequences of the
problems it has caused.”

Question 579:
Since a spirit receives its mission from God, how could God
entrust an important mission of general interest to a spirit
who may fail?

Answer:
“Doesn’t God know whether his general will be victorious
or defeated? Rest assured that it is so, and the divine plans,
when important, do not rely on those who might abandon
the work in the middle of it. The whole issue for you is the
knowledge of the future, which God possesses, but which
is not given to you.”

Question 580:
Does a spirit who incarnates to fulfill a mission have the same
apprehensions as the one who incarnates to undergo a trial?

Answer:
“No. It has experience.”

Question 581:
Individuals who are the lights of humankind, those who
enlighten humans with their genius, obviously have a mission.
But amongst them are those who are mistaken, and who,
instead of great truths, spread great errors. How should we
regard their mission?

Answer:
“As having been falsified by them. They are beneath the
task they have undertaken. However, it is necessary to
take circumstances into account. Geniuses must speak
according to the time in which they live. Thus, a teaching
that appears erroneous or puerile to a later era may have
been sufficient during its own time.”

Question 582:
Can parenthood be considered a mission?

Answer:
“It is, without any doubt, a mission, and at the same
time, a very great duty that involves parents more than
they might think concerning their responsibility for the
future. God has placed children under the care of their
parents so that they may guide them on the path of the
good, and has facilitated their task by giving children
a frail and delicate organization that renders them
accessible to all sorts of impressions. However, there are
those who are more concerned with training the trees
in their orchards and making them produce fine fruit
than with training the character of their children. If their
children fail due to their neglect, they will have to bear
the punishment, and the sufferings of their children will
come back to them in a future life because they did not
do what was incumbent on them for their children’s
advancement on the path of the good.”

Question 583:
If a child goes astray, in spite of the care of the parents, are they
still responsible?

Answer:
“No, but the more the child is disposed toward evil, the
heavier their task is and the greater will be their merit if they
manage to divert the child away from the path of evil.”

– If a child becomes a good adult, despite the negligence or
bad examples of the parents, do the parents receive any benefit
from it?

“God is just.”

Question 584:
What could be the nature of the missions of conquerors
whose only aim is to satisfy their ambition, and who, in
order to reach their goal, do not recoil before any calamity
they may cause?

Answer:
“Most of the time, they are nothing more than instruments
used by God for fulfilling the divine designs. Such
calamities are often the means for enabling a people to
advance more rapidly.”

– If those who are the instruments of such temporary calamities
are unaware of the good that may result from them because
they inflicted them with a personal aim in mind, will they
nevertheless profit from the resultant good?

“All are rewarded according to their deeds, the good they
meant to do and the honesty of their intentions.”

Incarnate spirits have occupations inherent to their corporeal
existence. In the errant state or dematerialization, their occupations
are in proportion to their degree of advancement. Some journey
from world to world, learning and preparing for a new incarnation.
Others, more advanced, occupy themselves with progress by
directing events and suggesting favorable thoughts; they assist the
geniuses who concur in the advancement of humankind. Others
reincarnate on a mission of progress. Still others take under their
care individuals, families, human agglomerations, cities and peoples,
for whom they become guardian angels, protector spirits and fami­
liar spirits. Finally, others preside over the phenomena of nature,
of which they are the direct agents. Ordinary spirits meddle in our
occupations and amusements. Impure or imperfect spirits wait in
suffering and anguish for the moment in which it pleases God to
grant them the means of advancing. If they practice evil, it is out of
spite for not yet being able to enjoy the good.