Good and Evil

Question 629:
What definition may be given to morality?

Answer:
“Morality is the rule of good conduct; in other words, it
is the ability to distinguish between good and evil. It is
founded on the observance of God’s law. Humans behave
correctly when they do everything for the good of all, for
then they obey God’s law.”

Question 630:
How can we distinguish between good and evil?

“Good is everything that is in harmony with God’s law,
whereas evil is everything that deviates from it. Thus,
doing what is good conforms to God’s law, while doing
evil infringes on it.”

Question 631:
Do humans have the means within them to distinguish
between good and evil?

Answer:
“Yes, when they believe in God and desire to know
God, who has given them intelligence to discern one
from the other.”

Question 632:
Since humans are prone to error, couldn’t they be mistaken
in discerning good from evil and believe that they are doing
what is good, when in reality they are doing what is evil?

Answer:
“Jesus said, ‘Do unto others what you would want them
do unto you’; that sums up everything. Obey it and you
will never go wrong.”

Question 633:
The rule of good and evil, which may be called the rule of

“reciprocity” or “solidarity”, does not apply to individuals’ own
conduct regarding themselves. Can they find a rule and a safe
guide for such conduct in natural law?

Answer:
“When you eat too much, it harms you. Well then, that
is God letting you know how much you really need, and
when you exceed it, you are punished. The same applies
to everything else. Natural law outlines for all humans the
limit of their needs, and when they exceed that limit they
are punished by suffering. If they would always listen to
that voice that says ‘enough’, they would avoid most of the
ills they accuse nature of.”

Question 634:
Why may evil be found in the very nature of things? I am
speaking of moral evil. Couldn’t God have created humankind
under better moral conditions?

Answer:
“We have already told you: spirits are created simple and
ignorant (see no. 115). God leaves men and women to
choose their own path, and it is worse for them if they
take the evil one – their pilgrimage will be all the longer. If
there were no mountains, humans would not understand
that they can ascend and descend; if there were no rocks,
they would not understand that there are hard objects.
The spirit must acquire experience, and to do so it must
know good and evil. That is why there is a union of spirit
and body.” (See no. 119)

Question 635:
The different social positions create needs that are not the
same for everyone. Is natural law, therefore, not a uniform
rule for everyone?

Answer:
“Such different positions exist in nature itself and are
in accord with the law of progress, but this fact does
not invalidate the unity of natural law, which applies to
everything.”

The conditions of a person’s existence change according to time and
place; hence, the different needs and social positions corresponding
to such needs. Since this diversity is in the very order of things, it
conforms to God’s law, which nonetheless continues to be one in
principle. It thus falls to reason to distinguish between real needs
and fictitious or conventional needs.

Question 636:
Are good and evil absolute for everybody?

Answer:
“God’s law is the same for everybody, but evil especially
depends on the willingness one has for doing it. Good
is always good and evil is always evil, whatever a person’s
position may be. The difference is in the degree of
responsibility.”

Question 637:
Are cannibals who yield to their instinct guilty when they eat
human flesh?

“I have said that evil depends on the will. Well then, persons
are guiltier the more they know what they should do.”

Circumstances give good and evil a relative seriousness. People
frequently commit wrongs that are nonetheless reprehensible even
if they result from the social position in which society has placed
them; however, their responsibility depends on the means at their
disposal for comprehending good and evil. Thus, the enlightened
person who commits a simple injustice is guiltier in God’s sight
than the primitive who obeys his or her natural instincts.

Question 638:
It seems that evil sometimes results from necessity. Such is,
for example, the necessity in certain cases for destruction,
even that of our fellow beings. In such cases, has there been a
transgression of God’s law?

Answer:
“Evil is no less evil by being necessary, but this necessity
disappears as the soul purifies itself in passing from one
existence to another. Then people become guiltier when they
commit evil because they have a better understanding of it.”

Question 639:
The evil we commit frequently results from the position in which
others have placed us. In such a case, who is more culpable?

Answer:
“The responsibility for evil falls upon the one who has
caused it. Thus, those who are led into evil by the position
in which others have placed them are less culpable than
those who have made them commit it. All will suffer the
penalty not only for the evil they have done, but for the
evil they have caused.”

Question 640:
Are those who do not do evil themselves, but who take advantage
of the evil committed by others culpable to the same degree?

Answer:
“It is as if they themselves had committed it; upon taking
advantage of it, they participate in it. Perhaps they would
have recoiled before the deed itself, but once it was done
and they then took advantage of it, it was because they

approved of it and would have committed it themselves if
they could have or if they had been more daring.”

Question 641:
Is the desire for evil as reprehensible as evil itself?

Answer:
“That depends. There is virtue in willingly resisting the
desire for evil if one desires to commit it, especially when
there is a possibility of satisfying the desire. However, if it
is only because the opportunity did not present itself, the
person is culpable.”

Question 642:
In order to be pleasing to God and to ensure our future
situation, is it enough simply not to do what is evil?

Answer:
“No. All must do good to the best of their abilities, for all
will answer for all the evil that has resulted from the good
they left undone.”

Question 643:
Are there persons who have no possibility of doing good because
of their position?

Answer:
“There are none who cannot do good; only selfish persons
never find an opportunity for doing so. It is enough to
come in contact with others in order to do good, and
everyday life offers such a possibility to whomever is not
blinded by selfishness. Doing good does not only mean
being charitable, but also being as useful as possible
whenever your help is needed.”

Question 644:
Aren’t the surroundings in which certain people live the main
reason for many to involve themselves in vice and crime?

Answer:
“Yes, but even then it is the result of a trial chosen by their
spirit in the state of freedom. It wanted to expose itself to
temptation in order to have the merit of resisting it.”

Question 645:
When individuals are immersed in an atmosphere of vice,
doesn’t evil become an almost irresistible draw?

“Draw, yes; irresistible, no, because in the midst of such an
atmosphere of vice you can nonetheless find great virtue.
There are spirits who have the strength to resist, and who
have, at the same time, the mission of exerting a good
influence on their fellow beings.”

Question 646:
Does the merit of the good that one does depend on certain
conditions; that is, are there different degrees of merit in
doing good?

Answer:
“The merit lies in its difficulty. There is no merit in doing
good if there is no self-denial and if it costs nothing. God
takes more notice of poor individuals who share their
only piece of bread than of the rich who give only what is
superfluous to them. Jesus told you this in the parable of
the widow’s mite.”