Equality of Rights between Men and Women

Question 817:
Are men and women equal before God and do they have the
same rights?

Answer:
“Hasn’t God given them both the knowledge of good and
evil and the faculties for progress?”

Question 818:
Where does the moral inferiority of women in certain regions
come from?

Answer:
“From the unjust and cruel dominion that men have
exerted over them. It is a result of social institutions and
the abuse of strength over weakness. Among men who
have not advanced very much from the moral point of
view, might makes right.”

Question 819:
For what purpose are women physically weaker than men?

Answer:
“To assign special functions to them. Men are meant for rough
work by being stronger; women for lighter work. But both
mutually help each other in the trials of a life full of bitterness.”

Question 820:
Doesn’t women’s physical weakness make them naturally
dependent on men?

Answer:
“God has given strength to some in order to protect the
weak, not to enslave them.”

God has fitted the organization of each sex for the functions that
it must perform. If God has given less physical strength to women,
God has at the same time given them greater sensitivity in relation
to the delicacy of the maternal functions and the fragility of the
beings entrusted into their care.

Question 821:
Are the functions for which women are intended by nature as
important as those conferred upon men?

Answer:
“Yes, and even greater – women give men the first notions
of life.”

Question 822:
Since all people are equals before God’s law, shouldn’t they also
be equals before human law?

Answer:
“This is the first principle of justice: ‘Do not do unto
others what you do not want them to do unto you.’”

– Accordingly, in order for legislation to be perfectly just, shouldn’t
it consecrate the equality of rights between men and women?

“Equality of rights, yes; of functions, no. All persons
must have a specific place and their occupations should
reflect their aptitude. In order to be just, human law
must consecrate the equality of rights between men and
women. Any special privilege granted to one and not the
other is contrary to justice. The emancipation of women
accompanies the progress of civilization; their servitude is in
step with barbarity. Besides, sex exists only in the physical
organization, and since spirits can become either, there are
no differences between them in this respect. Consequently,
they should enjoy the same rights.”