The Inequality of Wealth

Question 808:
Doesn’t the inequality of wealth originate in the inequality of
faculties, which give to some persons more means of acquiring
things than other persons?

Answer:
“Yes and no. What would you say about fraud and robbery?”

– So, would inherited wealth be the fruit of evil passions?

“What do you know about it? Go back to its origin to
find out if it is pure. Do you know whether or not if at

its source it was the fruit of spoliation or injustice? But
apart from the issue of its possible evil origin, do you
believe that the longing for wealth – even when honestly
acquired – and the secret longing conceived to possess it
as soon as possible are laudable sentiments? That is what
God judges, and I can assure you that the divine judgment
is more severe than that of humans.”

Question 809:
If a fortune has been wrongly acquired to start with, are the
heirs later responsible for this?

Answer:
“Of course, they are not responsible for the wrong that
others committed, especially if they are ignorant of it. But
you should know that a fortune is often destined for certain
individuals in order to provide them the opportunity to
repair an injustice. Happy for them if they comprehend
this! If they repair the injustice in the name of the one
who committed it in the first place, the reparation will
be taken into account for everyone concerned, because it
is almost always the original wrong-doer who, from the
spirit world, inspires them to do it.”

Question 810:
We may dispose of our assets more equitably or less equitably
without breaking the law. Thus, are we responsible for our
testamentary dispositions after death?

Answer:
“Every action bears its own fruit; the fruit of good deeds
is sweet, whereas the fruit of other deeds is always bitter.
Always bear this in mind.”

Question 811:
Is absolute equality of wealth possible and has it ever existed?

Answer:
“No, it is not possible. The diversity of faculties and
characters opposes it.”

– Nevertheless, there are those who believe it to be the remedy
for all social ills. What do you think of that?

“Either they are framers of theories, or they are ambitious
and envious. They do not understand that equality
would be quickly broken by the very force of things.
Fight selfishness, for that is your social plague. Do not
run after chimeras.”

Question 812:
If equality of wealth is not possible, does the same apply to
well-being?

Answer:
“No, but well-being is relative and everyone could enjoy
it if humans understood each other better, for true wellbeing consists in employing one’s time according to one’s
liking, and not in working at something one does not
enjoy. Since everyone has different aptitudes, no useful
work would therefore be left undone. Equilibrium exists
in everything; humans are the ones who upset it.”

– Is it possible for everyone to understand one another?

“Humans will understand one another when they practice
the law of justice.”

Question 813:
There are persons who fall into deprivation and poverty through
their own fault. May society be held responsible for this?

Answer:
“Yes, we have already told you that society is always the
primary cause of such wrongs. Isn’t it society’s responsibility
to attend to the moral education of its members? It is
frequently bad education that distorts these persons’
judgment, instead of stifling their harmful tendencies.”
(See no. 685)