The Justice of Reincarnation

Question 171:
On what is the doctrine of reincarnation based?

Answer:
“On the justice of God and revelation. We will repeat
this to you over and over: a good father always leaves
the door of repentance open to his children. Doesn’t
reason tell you that it would be unjust to keep eternal
bliss from those who have not enjoyed the opportunities
needed to improve themselves? Aren’t all people God’s
children? It is only among selfish human beings that
we find iniquity, insatiable hatred, and unforgiving
punishment.”

All spirits are en route toward perfection and God furnishes them
with the means of accomplishing it through the trials of corporeal
life. Out of divine justice, God permits them to accomplish in new
existences whatever they could not do or complete in a previous trial.

It would not be consistent with equity or according to God’s
goodness to punish forever those who, regardless of their will, had
encountered obstacles to their improvement within the surroundings
in which they had been placed. If the fate of all human beings is
irrevocably sealed after their death, it would mean that God does
not weigh the actions of all on the same scales and that God does
not treat everyone impartially.

The doctrine of reincarnation, which consists in accepting the fact
that humans have many successive lives, is the only one that is in
line with the idea of God’s justice concerning those of a lower moral
condition. It is the only one that can explain our future and give
us hope because it offers us the means of atoning for our errors
through new trials. Reason confirms this and it is what the Spirits
have taught us.

Those who are aware of how imperfect they are derive a consoling
hope from the doctrine of reincarnation. If they truly believe in
the justice of God, they cannot expect to be equal for all eternity
to those who have done better than they. The thought that such
imperfection will not exclude them forever from the supreme good,
and the fact that they will be able to reach it through continued
effort supports them and renews their courage. Who, at the end of
one’s career, does not regret having acquired a particular experience
too late to have profited from it? This lately acquired experience will
not be lost, however; it will be of benefit in a new existence.