The Affection of Certain Spirits for Certain Persons

Question 484:
Do spirits affectionately prefer certain persons?

Answer:
“Good spirits sympathize with moral individuals or those
who are susceptible to improving themselves; low order
spirits, with wicked individuals or those who may become
such. Hence, their affection is the result of a similarity of
sentiment.”

Question 485:
Is the affection of spirits for certain persons exclusively moral?

Answer:
“True affection has nothing carnal about it, but when a
spirit attaches itself to a particular person, it is not always
out of affection. A remembrance of human passions can
have a hand in it.”

Question 486:
Do spirits take an interest in our misfortunes and prosperity?
Are those who wish us well concerned about the afflictions we
experience in life?

Answer:
“Good spirits do all the good they can and they feel happy
for your joys. They are concerned about your afflictions
when you do not bear them with resignation, because then
they produce no good results for you; you carry on like
patients who reject the bitter medicine meant to heal them.”

Question 487:
What kind of afflictions cause spirits to be concerned about us
most: physically-caused afflictions or morally-caused ones?

Answer:
“Your selfishness and hard heartedness: everything else
derives from these. They smile at all your imaginary ills
born from pride and ambition, but they rejoice in those
that will shorten the length of your trial.”

Knowing that corporeal life is only transitory and that the
tribulations accompanying it are the means leading to a better state,
spirits are more concerned about the moral causes that keep us from
that state than about physical ills, which are only temporary.

Spirits care little about misfortunes that only affect our mundane
ideas, as we care little about the puerile afflictions of childhood.

Spirits who see in the afflictions of life a means for our advancement
consider them as a momentary crisis that will restore us to health.
They commiserate in our sufferings just as we commiserate in the
sufferings of a friend; but seeing things from a more correct point
of view, they regard them differently. While good spirits rebuild our
courage for the sake of our future, others incite us to desperation
and try to jeopardize us.

Question 488:
Do our relatives and friends who have preceded us into the
other life have more sympathy for us than spirits who are
strangers?

Answer:
“Of course, and as spirits they frequently protect you
according to their power.”

– Are they sensitive to our affections for them?

“Very sensitive, but they forget those who forget them.”