The Fate of Children after Death

Question 197:
Is the spirit of a child who dies very young as advanced as that
of an adult?

Answer:
“Sometimes much more so because the child may have
had more existences and may have therefore acquired
more experiences, especially if he or she has progressed.”

– Then can the spirit of a child be more evolved than that of
its parent?

“That is very frequently the case. Haven’t you yourself
often witnessed it?”

Question 198:
Does the spirit of a child who dies very young without having
done any evil belong to the higher degrees?

Answer:
“If such a child has done nothing evil, it has also done
nothing good. God does not relieve such a spirit of the
trials it must undergo. If it is pure, it is not because it was
a child, but because it was already advanced.”

Question 199:
Why is life so often cut short in childhood?

Answer:
“The length of a child’s life can be, for its spirit, the remainder of a
former life that had been cut short before its due term. Moreover,
the death of a child is often a trial or an expiation for the parents.”

– What becomes of the spirit of a child who dies very young?

“It begins a new existence.”

If humans had only one life to live, and if afterwards their fate were
sealed for all eternity, why would half the human species, who die
while very young, deserve to enjoy eternal bliss without having lived
a full life of effort? And by what right would they be exempt from the
oft-so-painful conditions imposed on the other half? Such an order
of things could not be in accord with the justice of God. Through
reincarnation, absolute justice is the same for all. The future belongs
to all, without exception and without favoritism, and those who
arrive last will have only themselves to blame. Individuals must have
the merit of their actions, for which they are justly responsible.

Moreover, it is unreasonable to consider childhood as a state of
innocence. Do we not see children endowed with the worst instincts
at an age at which education could not have yet exerted its influence?
What about those who seem to be born cunning, deceitful and
treacherous, who even harbor instincts for thieving and murder,
in spite of the good examples surrounding them? Criminal law
absolves them when they commit misdeeds by considering them
to have acted without discernment, driven more by instinct than
deliberate intent. But where do such instincts come from, which
differ so widely among children of the same age, reared under the
same conditions and subject to the same influences? Where does
such precocious wickedness come from if not from the imperfect
nature of the spirit, since education has nothing to do with it? Those
who are really wicked have progressed less and must therefore suffer
the consequences, not of their acts during their present childhood,
but of their previous lives. It is thus that the law is the same for all
and that the justice of God extends to all.