The Properties of Matter

Question 29:
Is ponderability an essential attribute of matter?

Answer:
“Of matter as you understand it, yes, but not of matter
considered as the universal fluid. The ethereal and subtle
matter that forms this fluid is imponderable to you, and
yet it is the very principle of your ponderable21 matter.”

Ponderability is a relative property. Outside the gravitational pull
of the globes, there is no weight – just as there is no up or down.

Question 30:
Does matter consist of one or many elements?

Answer:
“One single primitive element. The bodies you regard as
simple are not true elements, but rather transformations
of the one primitive matter.”

Question 31:
Where do the different properties of matter come from?

Answer:
“From the modifications that the elementary molecules undergo
as a result of their combining under certain conditions.”

Question 32:
Then wouldn’t flavors, odors, colors, sounds – even the poisonous
or healing qualities of certain bodies  – be no more than
modifications of the one and the same primitive substance?

Answer:
“Yes, of course; and they only exist due to the disposition
of the organs that are meant to perceive them.”

This principle is proven by the fact that not all people perceive the
qualities of objects in the same way: what one person finds tasty,
another might find disgusting; what appears blue to one person
may appear as red to another; something that is poisonous for some
might be harmless or even healthy for others.

Question 33:
Is the same elementary matter capable of undergoing all
possible modifications and acquiring all possible properties?

Answer:
“Yes, and this is what you should understand when we say
that ‘everything is in everything.’”22

21 Ponderable: Worth serious consideration or having appreciable weight (Webster’s, op.
cit.), i.e. something material that can be studied. – Tr.

22 This principle explains the phenomenon known by all magnetizers, which consists in
using willpower to confer very different properties upon any given substance – water,

The General Elements of the Universe

Oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon and all the other elements we
consider to be simple are only modifications of the one primitive
substance. As it is yet impossible for us to go back to this substance
except by thinking about it, the elements truly are elements to us, and
without further ado we can consider them as such until further notice.

– Doesn’t this theory affirm the opinion of those who do not
believe in more than only two essential properties for matter:
force and movement, and who believe that all the other
properties are only secondary effects that vary according to the
intensity of the force and direction of the movement?

“This opinion is correct, but it should also add: according to the
arrangement of the molecules; this may be seen, for example,
in an opaque body that becomes transparent and vice versa.”

Question 34:
Do molecules have a defined form?

Answer:
“Certainly, molecules have a form, but you are incapable
of discerning it.”

– Is this form constant or variable?

“Constant for the primitive elementary molecules but
variable for the secondary ones, which are only aggregations
of the former. However, what you term a molecule is still
very far from being the elementary molecule.”