Metempsychosis

Question 611:
Isn’t the common origin of living beings in the intelligent
principle an affirmation of the doctrine of metempsychosis?

Answer:
“Two things may have the same origin, and yet not
resemble each other at all later on. Who would recognize
the tree, its leaves, its flowers and its fruit in the shapeless
germ contained in the seed from which they came? From
the moment when the intelligent principle reaches the
necessary degree for becoming a spirit and for entering
the period of humanness, it has no more relationship with
its primitive state. It is no longer the soul of the animal
like the tree is no longer a seed. In humans, there is only
the animal-like body, the passions that arise from that
body’s influence, and the instincts of self-preservation
inherent in matter. Therefore, one cannot state that such
and such a person is the incarnation of such and such
an animal. Consequently, metempsychosis, as commonly
understood, is incorrect.”

Question 612:
Could a spirit that has animated a human body incarnate in
an animal?

Answer:
“That would be a regression, and a spirit does not regress.
The river does not flow back to is source.” (See no. 118)

Question 613:
However erroneous may be the idea linked to metempsychosis,
couldn’t it be a result of the intuitive sentiment of the different
existences of an individual?

Answer:
“We recognize such an intuitive sentiment in this belief as
in many others, but like most intuitive ideas, humans have
perverted it.”

Metempsychosis would be correct if one understood it to mean the
progression of the soul from a lower to a higher state, accomplishing
the developments that will transform its nature.

However, it is erroneous in the meaning of direct transmigration from
the animal to the human and vice versa, which would imply the idea
of regression or fusion. And since such fusion is not possible between
corporeal beings of two different species, we have an indication of
their being of degrees that cannot assimilate each other, and the same
must apply to the spirits that animate them. If the same spirit could
animate them alternately, it would result in an identity of nature, and
this would translate into the possibility of material reproduction. On
the contrary, the reincarnation taught by the Spirits is founded upon
the evolutionary march of nature and the progression of humans
within their own species, which in no way diminishes their dignity.
What degrades them is the bad use they make of the faculties God has
given them for their advancement. Be what it may, the antiquity and
universality of the doctrine of metempsychosis, and the number of
eminent individuals who have professed it, proves that the principle
of reincarnation has its roots in nature itself. These are arguments in
its favor rather than against it, however.

The point of departure of a spirit is one of those issues that are
connected to the origin of things and that are among the secrets of
God. It has not been given to humans to know them completely,
and regarding them, they can only form mere suppositions,
constructing more or less probable theoretic systems. The spirits
themselves are far from knowing everything, and regarding what
they do not know, they may also have their own opinions that are
more sensible or less so.

It is thus that all do not think in the same way regarding the
connections between humans and animals. According to some, a
spirit only arrives at the human period after having been prepared
and individualized in the different degrees of the lower order beings
of creation. According to others, the human spirit would have always
belonged to the human race without having passed through the
animal experience. The first of these theories has the advantage of
giving an aim to the future of animals, which would thus comprise
the first links in the chain of thinking beings. The second is more
in conformance with the dignity of the human being and may be
summed up as follows:

The different species of animals do not proceed intellectually from
one another by way of evolution. Thus, the spirit of the oyster does
not subsequently become that of the fish, the bird, the quadruped
and, finally, the biped. Each species is an absolute type in itself,
physically and mentally, and each of its individuals draws from
the universal source the quantity of the intelligent principle that
it needs, according to the perfection of its organs and the work
it must perform in the phenomena of nature. It then returns to
the general mass at death. Those worlds more advanced than ours
(see no. 188) are also comprised of distinct species of animals that
are appropriate to the needs of those worlds and to the degree of
advancement of the humans they serve, but they do not proceed
from those of the earth, spiritually speaking. It is not the same
with human beings, however. From the physical point of view,
human beings are obviously a link in the chain of living beings,
but from the moral point of view there is a break in continuity
between humans and animals. Only human beings possess a soul
or spirit55, a divine spark that endows them with a moral sense
and an intellectual reach that the animals do not possess; it is the
principal being, pre-existent to and surviving the body, preserving
their individuality. What is the origin of the spirit? Where is its
starting point? Is it formed from the individualized intelligent
principle? This is a mystery that would be useless to search out, and
regarding which, as we have said, we can only construct theories.

What is constant and what stands out to reason and experience at
the same time, is the survival of the spirit, the preservation of its
individuality after death, its ability to evolve, its happy or unhappy
state in proportion to its advancement on the path of the good,
and all the moral truths that are the consequence of that principle.
As for the mysterious connections between humans and animals,
that, we repeat, is God’s secret, like many other matters whose
current understanding holds no importance for our advancement,
and on which it would be useless for us to dwell.