Innate Ideas

Question 218:
Does an incarnate spirit preserve any trace of the perceptions
it had and the knowledge it acquired in its previous lives?

Answer:
“A vague memory remains, giving the incarnate spirit what
you call innate ideas.”

– Then the theory of innate ideas is not just a myth?

“No, because the knowledge acquired in each existence is
not lost. When a spirit is free of matter, it always recalls
such knowledge. While incarnate, it may forget it partially
and temporarily, but the intuition that remains helps it
advance. Without it, it would always have to start over.
Instead, with each new existence the spirit starts from the
point at which it had finished the preceding one.”

– Then isn’t there a very close connection between two
successive existences?

“Not always as close as you might think, because the
conditions of the two lives are often very different; also,
the spirit may have progressed in the interval between
them.” (See no. 2l6)

Question 219:
What is the origin of the extraordinary abilities of those
individuals who, without any previous learning, seem to
have an intuition about certain areas of knowledge such as
languages, mathematics, etc.?

Answer:
“A memory of the past and the soul’s previous progress,
of which it now has no awareness. Where else could such
abilities have come from? Bodies change, but the spirit
does not – it merely changes its garment.”

Question 220:
In changing bodies, can spirits lose certain intellectual faculties;
for example, could they cease to have a taste for the arts?

Answer:
“Yes, if they dishonored that faculty or made a bad use of it.
Moreover, a faculty may remain dormant throughout an entire
existence because the spirit wishes to exercise an unrelated one.
In that case, it remains latent but reappears later.”

Question 221:
Are the instinctive sentiment of the existence of God and the
presentiment of the future life due to a retrospective memory
that humans have even in the primitive state?

Answer:
“They are a memory they have retained of what they knew
as spirits before incarnating, but pride often stifles this
sentiment.”

– Is it the same memory to which are owed certain beliefs related
to the Spiritist Doctrine and which are found in all cultures?

“This doctrine is as old as the world. That is why we find
it everywhere – proof that it is true. Since it preserves an
intuition of its spirit state, the incarnate spirit possesses
an instinctive awareness of the invisible world. This
awareness, however, is frequently distorted by prejudices,
as well as by superstitions arising from ignorance.”