Self-Knowledge

Question 919:
What is the most effective means for improving ourselves in
this life and for resisting the draw of evil?

Answer:
“A sage of antiquity has told you: ‘Know thyself.’”59

– We comprehend all the wisdom of that maxim, but the difficulty
is precisely in knowing ourselves. By what means can we do so?

“Do what I used to do when I was living on the earth. At the
end of each day I examined my conscience, reviewed what
I had done and asked myself whether or not I had failed to
fulfill some duty and whether or not anyone might have
had reason to complain about me. It was thus that I arrived
at knowing myself and at seeing what there was in me that
needed to be reformed. Those who every night would recall
all their actions during the day, and would ask themselves
what good or evil they have done, praying to God and
their guardian angel to enlighten them, would acquire great
strength for self-improvement, because, believe me, God
will assist them. Therefore, ask yourselves about what you
have done and toward what aim you acted in a particular
circumstance, whether you have done anything that you
would blame in others, and whether you have done anything
that you would not dare profess. Also ask: if it pleased God
to call me at this moment to enter the world of spirits, where
nothing is hidden, would I cower before anyone’s gaze?
Examine what you may have done against God, then against
your neighbor, and lastly, against yourselves. The answers will
be either repose for your conscience, or an indication of a
wrong that you must amend.

“Self-knowledge is therefore the key to individual
improvement. But, you will ask, how do we judge
ourselves? Won’t we be under the illusion of vanity, which
exalts our wrongs and makes them excusable? Misers think
they are simply being thrifty and foresightful, while proud
individuals think they are only full of dignity. All of this
is quite true, but you have a means of control that cannot
deceive you. When you are indecisive as to the quality of
any one of your actions, ask how you would judge it if it
had been done by someone else. If you would blame it
in another, it cannot be any more legitimate for you, for
God does not use two measures for justice. Also, seek to
know what others think about you and do not neglect the
opinion of your enemies, because they have no interest in
disguising the truth. Frequently, God places them beside
you as a mirror in order to warn you more frankly than a
friend would. Therefore, let those who are truly willing
to improve themselves examine their own conscience in
order to uproot from it their evil tendencies as they uproot
weeds from their garden. Let them balance out their moral
workday like business persons do with their profits and
losses, and I can assure you that there will be more profits
than losses. If you can say that your workday has been
good, you can sleep in peace and fearlessly wait for your
awaking in the other life.

“So formulate clear and precise questions and do not be
afraid to add to them; you would do very well to devote a
few minutes to securing eternal bliss. Don’t you work every
day to accumulate what you will need for rest in old age?
Isn’t this rest the object of all your desires, the goal that
enables you to endure temporary fatigue and deprivation?
Well then, what is the rest of a few days, troubled by the
infirmities of the body, compared to what awaits the moral
person? Isn’t it worth a little effort? I know that many will
say that the present is certain but the future is uncertain.
That is precisely the thought that we have been charged
with tearing down in your minds, for we desire to enable
you to understand that future in such a way that no doubt
can remain in your soul. This is why we first called your
attention to us through the phenomena of nature, by
touching your senses, and why later we gave you instructions
that each one of you has the duty to spread. It was with this
purpose in mind that we have dictated The Spirits’ Book.”

ST. AUGUSTINE

Many of the wrongs we commit pass by us unnoticed. In fact,
following the counsel of St. Augustine, if we would interrogate
our conscience more frequently, we would see how often we have
failed without noticing it by not having scrutinized the nature
and motive for our deeds. This interrogation method is somewhat
more precise than using a maxim, which we do not usually apply
to ourselves. It requires categorical yes-no answers that leave no
room for alternatives. They are personal assertions and from the
sum of the answers, we can compute the sum of the good and the
evil that exists in us.
