Progressive Transmigration

Question 189:
From the time it is first formed, does a spirit enjoy the fullness
of its faculties?

Answer:
“No. Like a human being, a spirit has its infancy. When
they first come into being, spirits have no more than an
instinctive existence, possessing only the consciousness
of themselves and their actions. Their intelligence only
develops little by little.”

Question 190:
What is the state of the soul during its first incarnation?

Answer:
“It resembles the state of infancy in corporeal life. Its
intelligence is only beginning to unfold  – it tries its
hand at life.”

Question 191:
Are the souls of our primitives in a state of spiritual infancy?

Answer:
“It is a relative infancy since they are already-developed
souls endowed with passions.”

– So do passions indicate development?

“Development, yes, but not perfection. They are a sign of
activity and an awareness of the Self. In the very young
soul, intelligence and life exist only in a seed-like state.”

The life of spirits as a whole follows the same phases as corporeal
life. A spirit passes gradually from the embryonic state to that of
childhood. Over a succession of periods it arrives at the adult state,
which is that of perfection, but with the difference that there is
no decline or decrepitude as in corporeal life. Even though its life
had a beginning, it will have no end, and from our point of view
it needs an enormous amount of time to pass from spirit infancy
to complete development. Furthermore, its progress does not all
occur on one globe only, but on several. The life of the spirit is
thus comprised of a series of corporeal existences, each providing
an opportunity for progress in the same way that each corporeal
existence is comprised of a series of days, over which the individual
acquires greater experience and knowledge. Nevertheless, just as in
human life there are fruitless days, likewise in the life of a spirit
there are corporeal existences that yield no improvement because it
did not know how to live them productively.

Question 192:
Through perfect conduct in this life, can we hurdle all the
degrees and become pure spirits without having passed through
the intermediate ones?

Answer:
“No, because what humans imagine as perfection is actually
very far from it; there are qualities they neither know about
nor comprehend. They may be as perfect as their nature
permits, but it is not absolute perfection. It is like certain
children who, no matter how precocious they may be,
must still pass through youth before arriving at maturity;
or ailing individuals who must go through convalescence
before recovering their health. Furthermore, spirits must
advance in knowledge as well as in morality, and if they have
progressed in one sense only, they will have to do so in the
other in order to reach the top of the ladder. Nevertheless,
the more individuals advance in their present life, the shorter
and less painful their subsequent trials will be.”

– Can humans in this life at least assure themselves of a less
bitter future existence?

“Yes, of course. They can reduce the length and difficulties
of the path. Only the negligent remain at a standstill.”

Question 193:
During their new existences, can humans regress to a lower
level than the one they have already reached?

Answer:
“In social position, yes; as a spirit, no.”

Question 194:
During a new incarnation, can the soul of a moral individual
animate the body of a scoundrel?

Answer:
“No, because a spirit cannot regress.”

– Can the soul of a wicked individual become the soul of a
moral one?

“Yes. If it repents, such would be a reward.”

The evolution of spirits is progressive and never regressive. They
raise themselves gradually through the hierarchy and do not descend
from the level they have reached. In their different corporeal lives,
they may descend as individuals but not as spirits. Thus, the soul
of a powerful person may later animate a humble artisan, and
vice versa, because positions among individuals are frequently the
inverse of the elevation of their morality. Herod was a king; Jesus
was a carpenter.

Question 195:
Mightn’t the possibility of improving oneself in another
existence lead some persons to persevere on the evil path with
the thought that they can always correct themselves later?

Answer:
“Those who think that way do not really believe anything
at all. The idea of eternal punishment no longer restrains
them because their reason rejects it; instead, it leads them
to question everything. If only reasonable means were used
to guide humans, there would be no such skeptics. During
its corporeal life, an imperfect spirit may think as you
have stated, but once released from matter it thinks very
differently. It soon perceives that it has calculated badly, and
so to make up for it, it will carry an opposite sentiment into its
new existence. Progress is accomplished thereby, which is why
on the earth there are those who are more advanced than
others. Some have already had the experiences that others
have yet to go through; the latter acquire such experiences
little by little. It depends on each individual to hasten his or
her own progress or to delay it indefinitely.”

Persons who find themselves in a dreadful situation desire to change it
as quickly as possible. Those who have convinced themselves that the
tribulations of this life are the consequence of their own imperfections
will seek to ensure a new existence that is less painful. This thought
will draw them away from the path of evil much more readily than
the thought of eternal fire, which they know to be pure nonsense.

Question 196:
Since spirits can only improve by undergoing the sufferings and
tribulations of corporeal existence, does it follow that material life
may be seen as a type of sieve or filter through which the beings of
the spirit world must pass in order to arrive at perfection?

Answer:
“Yes, that is right. They improve during such trials by
avoiding evil and practicing the good. However, it is only
after many incarnations or successive purifications and
after a longer or shorter lapse of time that, according to
their own efforts, they reach the goal meant for them.”

– Does the body influence the spirit to improve it, or does the
spirit influence the body?

“Your spirit is everything. Your body is a garment that
rots – that is all.”

We have a material image of the various degrees of the soul’s
purification in the juice of the vine. It contains the liquor called
spirits or alcohol, but it is weakened by the large quantity of foreign
elements that alter its essence. It only reaches absolute purity after
several distillations, each removing a portion of the impurities.
The alembic represents the body into which the soul must enter
to purify itself; the foreign elements are like the perispirit, which is
more and more purified as the spirit approaches perfection.