Minerals and Plants

Question 585:
What do you think of the division of nature into three
kingdoms or into two classes: organic beings and inorganic
beings? Some regard the human species as a fourth kingdom.
Which of these divisions is preferable?

Answer:
“They are all good. It depends on one’s point of view:
from a material point of view, there are only inorganic and
organic beings. From the moral point of view, however,
there are obviously four degrees.”

These four degrees in fact have well-marked characteristics,
although their edges seem to blend into each other. Inert matter,
which comprises the mineral kingdom, possesses no more than a
mechanical energy; plants, although composed of inert matter,
are endowed with vitality; animals, composed of inert matter
and endowed with vitality, also have a kind of instinctive, limited
intelligence, with an awareness of their existence and individuality;
lastly, human beings possess everything that exists in plants and
animals, and they dominate all the other classes through a special

and unlimited intelligence that provides them with the awareness
of their future, the perception of extra-material things and the
knowledge of God.

Question 586:
Do plants have any awareness of their existence?

Answer:
“No, they do not think; they have only organic life.”

Question 587:
Do plants feel sensations? Do they suffer when mutilated?

Answer:
“Plants receive the physical impressions that act upon
matter, but they do not have perceptions; consequently,
they do not feel the sensation of pain.”

Question 588:
Is the force that attracts plants towards each other independent
of their will?

Answer:
“Yes, because they do not think. It is a mechanical force of
matter acting upon matter; they cannot oppose it.”

Question 589:
Some plants – the mimosa and the dionea54, for example –
show movements that indicate great sensitivity, and in
some cases, a kind of will, like the latter, whose lobes seize
the fly that lands on it in order to suck its juices, seeming to
have set a trap to kill it. Are these plants endowed with the
faculty of thought? Do they have a will and do they form an
intermediary class between the plant and animal nature? Do
they comprise a transition from the one to the other?

Answer:
“Everything in nature is in transition by the same fact that
one thing does not resemble another, and that everything,
nevertheless, is linked together. Plants do not think, and
consequently have no will. The oyster, which opens itself,
and all other zoophytes do not possess thought. They have
no more than a blind and natural instinct.”

The human organism furnishes us with examples of analogous
movements that do not involve any participation of the will, such
as the digestive and circulatory functions. The pylorus closes itself
on contact with certain substances to refuse them passage. The
same applies to the mimosa, whose movements do not imply any
perception at all, much less a will.

Question 590:
In plants, as in animals, isn’t there an instinct for selfpreservation that leads them to seek what may be useful to
them and to avoid what may harm them?

Answer:
“There is, if you wish, a kind of instinct. It depends on
the extent you attribute to the word, but it is purely
mechanical. When you see two bodies combine during a
chemical reaction, it is because they harmonize with each
other, that is, there is an affinity between them, but you do
not call it instinct.”

Question 591:
On more highly evolved worlds, are the plants, like the other
beings, more perfect in nature?

Answer:
“Everything is more perfect, but the plants are always
plants, as the animals are always animals, and as the human
beings are always human beings.”