Destructive Calamities

Question 737:
For what purpose does God inflict humankind with destructive
calamities?

Answer:
“To impel them to progress more quickly. Haven’t we stated
that destruction is necessary for the moral regeneration of
spirits, who accomplish a new degree of perfection during each
new existence? You must see the end in order to appreciate the
results. You only judge such things from your own personal
point of view, and you regard such afflictions as calamities
because of the injury they cause you. However, these hardships
are often necessary in order to make things arrive at a better
order more quickly, and to accomplish in a few years what
would otherwise require many centuries.” (See no. 744)

Question 738:
Couldn’t God employ other methods instead of destructive
calamities for improving humankind?

Answer:
“Yes, and they are employed every day. Through the
knowledge of good and evil, God has given to each of you
the means of progressing. However, humans do not take
advantage of them; thus, it is necessary to afflict them in
their pride and make them feel their own weakness.”

– But the moral person succumbs to these calamities along
with the wicked. Is this just?

“Throughout life humans relate everything to their body, but
after death they think differently. As we have already stated,
the life of the body is almost nothing – a century in your
world is but a flash in eternity. The sufferings that last a few of
your months or days are nothing, and are only a lesson that
will serve you in the future. Spirits, who have preexisted and
have survived everything else, comprise the real world (see
no. 85). They are the children of God and the objects of the
divine kindness. Bodies are no more than disguises behind
which they make their appearance in the world. In the great
calamities that decimate humankind, moral persons who
succumb are like an army, which, during war, sees that its
uniforms have become tattered, worn out or lost. The general
is more concerned for his soldiers than their uniforms.”

– But aren’t the victims of these calamities actual victims
nonetheless?

“If we considered life as it is in itself, and how insignificant
it is in comparison with the infinite, the less importance we
would attach to it. In another life, those victims will find
ample compensation for their sufferings if they endured
them without complaining.”

Whether death results from a calamity or an ordinary cause, we
cannot escape it when the hour for our departure has come. The
only difference is that in the former case a greater number depart
at the same time.

If we could elevate ourselves through thought so as to encompass all
humankind in a single glance, these terrible calamities would seem
no more than passing storms in the destiny of the world.

Question 739:
Are destructive calamities useful from a physical point of view,
notwithstanding the hardships they cause?

Answer:
“Yes, they sometimes modify the conditions of a region,
but the good that results from them is usually only felt by
future generations.”

Question 740:
Couldn’t calamities also be moral trials for humankind by
exposing humans to the most afflictive needs?

Answer:
“Calamities are trials that furnish humans with an
opportunity to exert their intelligence and to demonstrate
their patience and resignation before the will of God.
At the same time, calamities enable them to develop the
sentiments of self-­denial, self-detachment and love for
their neighbor – if they are not dominated by selfishness.”

Question 741:
May we avert the calamities that afflict us?

Answer:
“Yes, in part, but not as is generally supposed. Many
calamities are the consequences of your own improvidence.
As you acquire knowledge and experience you become able
to avert them, that is, to prevent them if you know how to
study their causes. Among the ills that afflict humankind,
however, there are those of a general nature that belong to
the designs of Providence, and from which all individuals
receive, in a greater or lesser proportion, the share for
which they are responsible. They can do nothing about
these except resign themselves to God’s will. But even
these ills are usually aggravated by human carelessness.”

Among the destructive calamities that are natural and independent
of human actions we find plagues, famine, floods, and the
inclement weather conditions that are fatal to the productions
of the earth. But in science, in works of art, in improvements
of agriculture, in crop rotation and irrigation, and in the study
of hygienic conditions, has not humankind found the means to
neutralize or at least mitigate such disasters? Aren’t certain regions
that were formerly devastated by terrible calamities protected
nowadays? Therefore, what will humankind not accomplish for
their material well-being when they know how to make use of all
the resources of their intelligence, and when, caring for their own
self-preservation, they know how to ally it with the sentiment of
true charity for their fellow beings? (See no. 707)