Transitional Worlds

Question 234:
As some have stated, are there worlds that serve as layovers
and resting places for errant spirits?

“Yes, there are worlds that are intended particularly for
errant beings, worlds that they may temporally inhabit,
a type of camp site, a place where they can repose during
a very long errant state, a state that is always somewhat
wearisome. These are intermediary positions between
worlds and are gradated according to the nature of the
spirits who have access to them, and where they will enjoy
a greater or lesser sense of well-being.”

– Can the spirits who occupy such worlds leave whenever
they wish?

“Yes, spirits who temporarily inhabit those worlds can
leave them to follow their destiny. Imagine them to be
like migrating birds that descend on an island in order to
regain strength before continuing on their way.”

Question 235:
Do spirits progress during their layovers on these transitory
worlds?

Answer:
“Certainly. Those who gather on them do so with the
purpose of educating themselves in order to more easily
obtain permission to go to better and better places until
they reach the position of the elect.”

Question 236:
Due to their special nature, are these transitional worlds
destined forever to be layovers for errant spirits?

Answer:
“No, that function is only temporary.”

– Are they inhabited by corporeal beings at the same time?

“No, their surface is barren. Those who inhabit them do
not need anything.”

– Is this barrenness permanent, and is it connected to their
special nature?

“No, their barrenness is only transitory.”

– Then are these worlds destitute of natural beauties?

“Their nature is expressed in the beauties of their
immensity, and their beauties are no less admirable than
what you call natural ones.”

– Since the state of these worlds is transitory, will the earth be
among them some day?

“It already has been.”

– At what period?

“During its formation.”

Nothing in nature is useless; each thing has its purpose, its
destination. There is no empty space. Everything is inhabited
and life expands itself everywhere. Thus, during the long series
of ages that elapsed before the appearance of humankind on
the earth, during the long periods of transition attested to by
the geological layers, and even before the formation of the first
organic beings upon that formless mass, there was no absence of
life in that arid chaos in which the elements were being mixed
together. Beings who did not have our needs or our physical
sensations found a refuge there. Even in that imperfect state,
God willed for it to be useful for something. So, who would
dare say that among the billions of worlds that spin through
the immensity of space, only one – one of the smallest – lost in
the crowd, had the exclusive privilege of being populated? What
would be the usefulness of all the others? Could God have made
them merely as entertainment for our eyes? Such is an absurd
presumption, incompatible with the wisdom that shines in all
God’s works, and unacceptable if we consider all those that we
cannot see. No one can deny that, in this notion of worlds which
are still unsuitable for material life and which are nevertheless
populated with beings appropriate for the conditions on them,
there is something grand and sublime, where perhaps we may
find the solution to more than one problem.