Considerations concerning
the Plurality of Existences

Question 222:
Some persons have stated that the doctrine of reincarnation
is not new, that it was taken from Pythagoras. We have never
said that the Spiritist Doctrine is a modern invention. Since
it stems from the very laws of nature, Spiritism per se must
obviously have existed since the beginning of time, and we
have always sought to show that traces of it may be found
in remotest antiquity. It is well known that Pythagoras
was not the creator of the theory of metempsychosis39;
he took it from the Hindu philosophers and Egyptians,
who had believed in it from time immemorial. The idea
of the transmigration of souls was therefore a common
belief, accepted by the most eminent individuals. By what
road did this idea come to them? Was it by revelation or
intuition? We do not know. Whatever the case may be,
an idea could not have traversed the ages and have been
accepted by the most advanced minds if there were not
something to it. The ancientness of this doctrine should
therefore be, if anything, a proof in its favor rather than
an objection against it. However, it is equally known
that between the metempsychosis of the ancients and the
modern doctrine of reincarnation there is this one main
difference: the Spirits absolutely reject the transmigration
of human souls into animals, and vice versa.

In teaching the doctrine of the plurality of corporeal existences,
the Spirits have thus renewed a doctrine that was born during
the earliest ages of the world, and which has been preserved up
to our time in the inmost thought of many persons. However,
the Spirits have presented it from a more rational point of view,
more according to the progressive laws of nature, and more
in harmony with the wisdom of the Creator by divesting it
of all the accouterments of superstition. A point worth
noting is that it is not only in this book that they have
taught it recently: even before it was published, numerous
communications of the same nature had been received in
many regions, and they have multiplied considerably since
then. Moreover, it might be pertinent to examine why it is
that not all the Spirits seem to be in agreement regarding
this doctrine; we shall revisit that issue later.

But for now let us examine the issue at hand from another
angle, apart from any revelations by the Spirits. We shall
put them aside for the moment and assume that this theory
did not come from them at all. Let us even assume that we
have never even pondered it together with the Spirits. Let
us instead place ourselves in a neutral position for the time
being and accept the same degree of likelihood of truth for
both the hypothesis of the plurality of corporeal existences
and that of a single existence, and let us see towards which
side reason and our own interests will take us.

Some individuals reject the idea of reincarnation for the
simple reason that it is inconvenient to them. They declare
that one existence is quite enough, and that they have no
desire to recommence a similar one. We even know persons
who become infuriated at the simple thought of returning to
the earth. We would ask them whether God ought to ask for
their advice and consult their wishes in setting the universe in
order! One of two possibilities applies: either reincarnation is
a fact, or it is not. If it is, it is useless for these individuals to
oppose it; they will have to undergo it without God asking for
their permission. Opposing it would be the same as a sick man
saying, “I’ve already suffered too much today; I don’t want to
suffer anymore tomorrow.” No matter how unwilling he may
be, he will not suffer any less tomorrow or in the days that
follow until he is cured. Likewise, if those individuals must
live again corporeally, they will do so; they will reincarnate.
They will protest in vain like a child who does not want to
go to school, or a criminal condemned to prison, because
they will have to reincarnate nevertheless. Objections of this
type are too childish to deserve a more serious examination.
However, in order to reassure such persons, we will state that
the Spiritist doctrine of reincarnation is not as terrible as
they might think, and that if they were to study it in depth,
they would realize they have nothing to fear. They would
understand that each new existence depends on themselves;
that it will be happy or unhappy according to what they are
doing in their present one; that from this life onwards, if they
improve themselves to a certain degree, they will never have to
fear falling back into the swamp.

We will presume that we are addressing persons who believe
in some kind of future after death, rather than those who
believe that only nothingness awaits them, or those who
wish to immerse their soul into the universal whole without
preserving their individuality, like drops of rain falling into
the ocean. If you believe in any kind of future at all, you
certainly do not suppose that it will be the same for all,

because that would imply that doing good during one’s life
would not matter in the end. In other words, why restrain
ourselves; why not satisfy all our passions, all our desires –
even at the expense of others – if our future will be neither
better nor worse for it? If, on the other hand, you believe
that the future will be happier or less happy according to
what one does in life, would you not desire to make it as
happy as possible because it will have implications for all
eternity? Do you, by any chance, fancy yourself as being one
of the most perfect creatures who has ever walked the earth
and thus have an immediate right to the bliss of the elect? I
would not think so. Thus, without your having to consider
yourself among the reprobate, you must admit that there
are those who deserve more than you do, and who have a
right to a better situation. Well then, mentally place yourself
for a moment in that middle position, which (as you admit)
you occupy at the moment, and imagine that someone says
to you, “You suffer; you are not as happy as you could be,
whereas there are others all around you who seem to enjoy
perfect happiness. Would you like to trade your situation for
theirs?” “Of course, I would!” you reply, “But what do I have
to do?” “Almost nothing. Simply start over what you have
done badly and try to do it better.” Would you hesitate to
accept this proposition, even if it cost you many lifetimes of
trial? Let us make a more prosaic comparison. Suppose you
were to say to a man who, although not in extreme poverty,
is going through hard times due to his precarious resources,

“There is a huge fortune for you to enjoy; however, you
must work hard for it for exactly one minute.” If he were
the laziest being on earth, he would not hesitate to say, “I’m
willing to work for one minute, two minutes, an hour, a
whole day if necessary! What difference would that make if
my life will end up in abundance?” Well then, what is the
duration of one corporeal life when compared to eternity?
Less than a minute; less than a second.

We sometimes hear this sort of reasoning: God, who is
supremely good, would not impose on us the obligation to
recommence another series of misfortunes and tribulations.
Do they by any chance believe that God would show more
kindness in condemning people to eternal suffering because
of a few moments of error than in granting them the means
to repair their wrongs? Two manufacturers each had a
worker who aspired to partnership, but on one particular
workday, both workers were unproductive and deserved to
be fired. One of the manufacturers actually fired his worker
despite his pleas, and since he was unable to obtain any
other employment, he died in poverty. The other, however,
said to his worker, “You have wasted a whole day so you owe
me compensation. You have performed badly so you owe
me reparation; however, I will let you start over tomorrow.
If you perform well, I will keep you, and you will be able to
continue aspiring to the higher position I promised you.”
Is it necessary to ask which of the two manufacturers was
more humane? Then would God, who is clemency itself, be
more inflexible than a human? There is something poignant
in the thought that our fate is sealed forever because of a few
years of trial, and considering the fact that all our efforts
are insufficient for reaching perfection while on earth,
the opposite idea is eminently consoling since it does not
deprive us of hope. Therefore, without deciding either for
or against the plurality of existences, and without favoring
one hypothesis over the other, we will simply state that if
the choice could be made, no one would prefer a sentence
that could not be appealed. A philosopher once said that if
God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent one for
the contentment of humankind. The same could be said

of the plurality of existences. As we stated previously, God
does not ask for our permission, nor does God consult our
preferences – things either are or they are not. Based on
such considerations, let us see on which side the odds might
lie. Let us consider the matter from another point of view –
still omitting the teaching of the Spirits – and examine the
issue solely as a philosophical endeavor.

If there is no reincarnation, then it is obvious that there can
be only one corporeal existence; thus, if there is only one
corporeal existence, then the soul of each individual must
be created at birth (unless we accept the preexistence of the
soul). However, if that were the case, then we would have to
ask what the soul was before birth and if such a preexistent
state would not comprise an existence of some kind or
other. There is no middle ground: either the soul existed
before the body, or it did not. If it existed, what was its
situation? Did it or did it not possess self-awareness? If it did
not, that would be about the same as saying that it did not
exist at all; however if it did, was its individuality progressive
or stationary? In either case, what was its situation when it
joined the body? According to the common belief, which
assumes that the soul is born at the same time as the body, or
likewise, that before incarnation it possessed only negative
faculties, we must ask the following questions:

1) Why does the soul display aptitudes that are so different
from and independent of the ideas acquired by education?

2) Why do some very young children display an extraordinary
aptitude for a particular area of knowledge, while others are
left in mediocrity throughout their entire lifetime?

3) Why do some children seem to be endowed with inborn
or intuitive ideas that are lacking in others?

Considerations concerning the Plurality of Existences

4) Why do certain children demonstrate precocious
impulses towards vice or virtue, or innate sentiments of
dignity or meanness that contrast so strikingly with the
environment into which they have been born?

5) Why is it that some individuals, regardless of their
education, are more advanced than others?

6) Why are there both uncivilized and civilized peoples?
If we took a Hottentot40 baby at birth, raised it, and then
sent it to one of our most renowned schools, could we
make it into a Laplace41 or a Newton42?

We would ask what philosophy or theosophy43 might
solve these problems. Either souls are equal at birth or they
are not – that we cannot doubt. If they are equal, why
are there such differences of aptitude? One could respond
that it depends on the physical organism, but in that case,
we would have a most monstrous and immoral doctrine.
Human beings would be no more than a machine, the
whim of matter. They would not be responsible for their
actions since everything could be attributed to their
physical imperfections. However, if souls are unequal,
then it is because God creates them so. Then, we must ask,
why is inborn mental superiority granted to some and not
to others? Would such favoritism be consistent with the
justice and love that God grants to all creatures equally?

On the other hand, if we admit to a succession of prior and
progressive existences, everything can be explained. At birth,
individuals bring with them the intuition of what they have
already acquired. They are more evolved or less so according
to the number of lives they have lived, or according to how
near or far they are from their starting point. It is exactly like
in a group of individuals of all ages, wherein each one will
have developed according to the number of years he or she
has lived. Successive lives represent for the life of the soul
what years represent for the life of the body. For example, on
the same day, bring together a thousand individuals ranging
from one to eighty years old. Now suppose that some sort of
veil has been mysteriously cast over all their previous days,
so that you unwittingly believe that all of them were born on
the same day. You would naturally ask why some are big and
others are little, some old and others young, some educated
and others still ignorant. Nevertheless, if the cloud hiding
their past were removed, if you were to suddenly realize that
all have lived for a longer or shorter amount of time, then
everything would be explained. God, out of divine justice,
could not have created some souls more advanced and
others less. With the plurality of existences, the inequality
that we see displays nothing contrary to the strictest equity.
There seems to be inequality merely because we see the
present only and not the past. Does this argument rest upon
some theory, some gratuitous supposition? No, because
we start from a patent, incontestable fact: the inequality
of aptitudes, and intellectual and moral development. We
have found that this fact cannot be explained by any current
theory, whereas a new theory gives it a simple, natural and
logical explanation. Would it be rational to prefer the one
that explains nothing to the one that explains everything?

Regarding the sixth question, it will doubtless be stated
that Hottentots are less advanced. But then we will ask:
are they or are they not human? If they are human, why
would God have denied them the privileges granted to
Caucasians? And if they are not humans, then why try to
make them Christians? The Spiritist Doctrine is much more
encompassing than all of that because it reveals that there
are not several species of human beings but only humans
as a whole. Their spirits are at different stages on the scale
of advancement, but they all are disposed to continually
evolve. Is this not more in harmony with the justice of God?

Heretofore, we have considered the soul according to its
past and its present. However, if we consider it with respect
to its future, we will encounter the same types of problems:

1) If the present life is decisive for our future destiny,
what will be the respective positions in the future life for
those of less advanced cultures and those of more highly
advanced cultures? Will they be on the same level or
divided regarding their eternal bliss?

2) Will those who have worked their entire lives to improve
themselves be on the same level as those who have remained
undeveloped, not due to their own fault but due to either
the lack of time or the ability to improve themselves?

3) Are those who have practiced evil because they were
unable to enlighten themselves liable for a state of affairs
that did not depend on them?

4) Efforts are made to enlighten, moralize and civilize
people, but for every one who becomes enlightened, there
are millions who die every day before the light has managed
to reach them. What is their fate? Will they be treated as
reprobates? If not, what have they done to deserve to be on
the same plane as the others?

5) What is the fate of children who die at a very early age
before having done either good or evil? If they are among
the elect, why are they granted such a favor without having
done anything to deserve it? And by what privilege have
they been exempt from the tribulations of a full lifetime?

Is there any doctrine that can solve these issues? However, accept
the existence of successive lives and everything can be explained
in conformity with God’s justice. What we are unable to
accomplish in one existence, we will in another. Thus, no one
escapes the law of progress. All will be rewarded according to
their true individual merit, and none will be excluded from the
supreme bliss to which they aspire, no matter what obstacles
they may have encountered along the way.

Such issues could be multiplied to infinity because the
psychological and moral problems that have no solution
other than the plurality of existences are innumerable  –
we have restricted ourselves only to the most general.
Nevertheless, it may still be argued that the doctrine of
reincarnation has not been accepted by the Church. It
would therefore be the subversion of Christianity. It is not
our objective at the moment to address this issue, since
it is sufficient for us to have shown that the doctrine is
eminently moral and rational. Furthermore, what is moral
and rational cannot be contrary to a religion that proclaims
God as goodness and reason par excellence. What would
have become of Christianity if, contrary to universal opinion
and the testimony of science, it had denied the evidence
and expelled whomever did not believe in the movement of
the sun and the six days of creation? What credit would a
religion deserve, and what authority would it have among
enlightened nations if it were based on such obvious errors
that were once articles of faith? Whenever evidence has
been established, the Church has wisely sided with it. If it is
proven that things exist which would be impossible without
reincarnation, if certain points of Church dogma cannot be
explained except by such means, then it will be necessary
to accept it and realize that the antagonism between this
doctrine and Church dogma is only apparent. Later, we will
show that perhaps the Church is less removed from this
doctrine than it thinks, and that it would suffer no more
in accepting it than it suffered from the discovery of the
movement of the earth around the sun and the geological
periods, which at first also seemed to contradict the sacred
texts. Moreover, the principle of reincarnation appears
in many scripture passages, and is found especially and
explicitly formulated in the Gospels:

“Descending from the mountain (after the transfiguration),
Jesus commanded them, saying, ‘Do not tell anyone what
you have seen until the Son of Man has been raised from
among the dead.’ His disciples then questioned him, ‘Then
why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?’ And
Jesus responded, ‘In truth, Elijah is to come first, and will
reestablish all things. But I declare to you that Elijah has
already come, and they did not know him, but made him
suffer everything they wished. It is thus that they will put
to death the Son of Man.’ Then his disciples understood
that he had spoken to them of John the Baptist.” (Mt. 17)

If John the Baptist was Elijah, he must have therefore been
the reincarnation of the spirit or soul of Elijah in the body
of John the Baptist.

Whatever may be the opinion that persons have about
reincarnation, whether they accept or reject it, no one will
escape it by merely believing to the contrary. The essential

point is that the teaching of the Spirits is eminently
Christian. It rests upon the immortality of the soul, future
punishment and reward, God’s justice, human free will
and the morals of Christ; it is therefore not anti-Christian.

As stated previously, our reasoning up to this point has
excluded all Spiritist teachings, which certain individuals
regard as being without authority. If we, as so many others,
have adopted the doctrine of the plurality of existences, it is
not only because it has come from the Spirits, but because
it has seemed to us to be the most logical and the only one
that resolves issues that until now have been irresolvable.
If it had come to us from a mere mortal, we would have
adopted it just the same, not hesitating to give up our own
former ideas. The moment an error is exposed, our self­esteem has more to lose than to gain in sustaining it. In
the same way, we would have rejected reincarnation, even
though it had come from the Spirits, if it had seemed to us
to be contrary to reason, just as we have rejected so many
other doctrines. We know by experience that we must not
blindly accept everything that comes from spirits in the
same way that we cannot accept everything that comes
from human beings. To our minds, its first merit is that
it is eminently logical. But it also has another merit in its
favor, confirmed by the facts, positive facts, material ones,
so to speak, which an attentive and well-reasoned study
may reveal to whomever strives to observe them with
patience and perseverance, and before which doubt is no
longer possible. Once these facts become widely known,
then like the formation and movement of the earth it will
be necessary to yield to the evidence, and its opponents
will have wasted opposing arguments in vain.

In sum, we recognize the fact that the doctrine of the
plurality of existences is the only one that can explain what
would be unexplainable without it, that it is eminently
consoling and conforms to the strictest justice. For
humankind it is the life-preserver that God, out of divine
mercy, has thrown to them.

The words of Jesus himself can leave no doubt about this.
As we read in the 3rd chapter of John’s Gospel:

Verse 3. In replying to Nicodemus, Jesus states: “Truly,
truly, I say to you that if a man is not born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God.”

Verse 4. Nicodemus says to him, “How can a man be born
when he is old? Can he enter again into his mother’s womb
and be born a second time?”

Verse 5. Jesus responds, “Truly, truly, I tell you that unless
he is born of water and of spirit, he cannot enter the
kingdom of God. What is born of the flesh is flesh, and
what is born of spirit is spirit. Do not be amazed that I
have told you, you must be born again.” (See below, The
Resurrection of the Flesh, no. 1010).
