Freedom of Conscience

Question 835:
Is freedom of conscience a consequence of freedom of thought?

Answer:
“Conscience is an inner thought that belongs to persons,
as do all their other thoughts.”

Question 836:
Do humans have the right to set up barriers to freedom of conscience?

Answer:
“No more so than to freedom of thought, because God
alone has the right to judge the conscience. If humans
use their laws to regulate relations between individuals,
God uses the laws of nature to regulate relations between
individuals and God.”

Question 837:
What is the result of barriers to freedom of conscience?

Answer:
“It constrains individuals to act against their own way
of thinking, turning them into hypocrites. Freedom of
conscience is one of the characteristics of true civilization
and progress.”

Question 838:
Is every belief respectable, even when notoriously wrongheaded?

Answer:
“Every belief is respectable when it is sincere and leads to
the practice of the good. Reproachable beliefs are those
that lead to evil.”

Question 839:
Are we blameworthy when we use our own beliefs to scandalize
someone who does not think like us?

Answer:
“It shows a lack of charity and goes against freedom of
thought.”

Question 840:
Does it go against freedom of conscience to obstruct beliefs that
might disturb society?

Answer:
“Acts may be restrained but inner belief is inaccessible.”

Restraining the external acts of a belief when such acts cause harm
to others does not go against freedom of conscience, for such
repression leaves to the belief its entire freedom.

Question 841:
Out of respect for freedom of conscience, should we allow the
propagation of harmful doctrines, or may we without going
against such freedom seek to lead back onto the path of truth
those who have been led astray by erroneous principles?

Answer:
“Certainly you may, and you should. But to follow
the example of Jesus, you must teach by gentleness and
persuasion and not by force since that would be worse than
the belief of the one whom you desired to convince. If
there is something that ought to be imposed, it is goodness
and fraternity; but we do not believe the means for doing
so is violence: conviction cannot be forcefully imposed.”

Question 842:
Since all doctrines claim to be the sole expression of the truth,
by what signs can we recognize which one actually has the
right to be presented as such?

Answer:
“It will be the one that produces the fewest hypocrites and
the greatest number of moral individuals, which means they
practice the law of love and charity in its greatest purity
and widest application. By this sign you will recognize
which doctrine is good, because those doctrines that result
in sowing disunion and establishing divisions among God’s
children can be only erroneous and harmful.”