Spirit and Matter

Question 21:
Is matter eternal like God, or was it created at some specific
time in the past?

Answer:
“Only God knows. Nevertheless, there is something
you should realize by using your reason: God, the very
personification of love and charity, has never been inactive.
No matter how long ago you might imagine the onset of
the divine action to have been, could you possibly conceive
of God as ever having been idle for even one second?”

Question 22:
Matter is generally defined as: that which has extension; that
which can impress our senses; that which is impenetrable. Are
these definitions correct?

Answer:
“From your own point of view they are correct because
you can only talk about matters that are familiar to you.
Matter, however, also exists in states that are unfamiliar.

The General Elements of the Universe

For example, it may be so ethereal and subtle that your
senses cannot detect it; it is matter nonetheless, even
though you do not perceive it as such.”

– Then how may we define matter?

“Matter is the tie that enchains spirit; it is the instrument
that spirit uses and upon which it simultaneously exerts
its action.”

From this viewpoint, one could say that matter is the agent or
intermediary that enables spirit to act while at the same time being
acted upon by spirit.

Question 23:
What is spirit?

Answer:
“The intelligent principle of the universe.”

– What is spirit’s innermost nature?

“It is not easy to explain spirit in your language. For
you, it is nothing because it is not something palpable;
nevertheless, for us it is something. You must realize that
nothing means nothing and nothing does not exist.”

Question 24:
Is spirit synonymous with intelligence?

Answer:
“Intelligence is one of the essential attributes of spirit, but
both merge into a common principle; thus, for you they
are one and the same thing.”

Question 25:
Is spirit independent of matter, or is it only a property of matter,
as colors are properties of light and as sound is a property of air?

Answer:
“They are distinct from each other, but the union of
spirit and matter is necessary to enable matter to act
intelligently.”

– Is this union equally necessary for the manifestation of spirit?

“For you it is necessary because you are not built to perceive

spirit apart from matter. Your senses are not formed to do so.”
(In this section we understand “spirit” to mean the intelligent
principle, rather than the entities designated by the name).

Question 26:
Can we conceive of spirit apart from matter, and matter apart
from spirit?

Answer:
“Absolutely, through thought.”

Question 27:
So are there two general elements in the universe: matter
and spirit?

Answer:
“Yes, and over everything is God, the Creator and author
of all. These three elements comprise the principle of all
that exists – they are the universal trinity. However, to the
element of matter must be added the universal fluid20,
which plays an intermediary role between spirit and matter
per se, since matter is too dense for spirit to act upon it
directly. Although from a certain point of view this fluid
may be regarded as part of the material element, it differs
from it due to special properties. If it were simply matter,
there would be no reason for spirit not to be matter too.
It is placed between spirit and matter, yet it is a fluid, just
as matter is matter. In its countless combinations with
matter, and under the direction of spirit, it is capable
of producing an infinite variety of things about which
you still know very, very little. By being the agent upon
which spirit acts, this universal, primitive or elementary
fluid is the principle without which matter would forever
remain in a state of dispersion; it would never acquire the

20 “... the universal cosmic fluid is the primitive elementary matter, whose modifications
and transformations comprise the innumerable variety of bodies found in nature... As the
universal elementary principle, it offers two distinct states: etherization or imponderability,
which may be considered the normal primitive state, and materialization or ponderability,
which is in a certain way only consecutive to the former. The intermediary point is the
transormation of the fluid into tangible matter. However, even then there is not a brusque
transition, because our imponderable fluids may be regarded as a halfway phase between
the two states”. (Allan Kardec, Genesis, International Spiritist Council, 2009, p. 354). – Tr.

The General Elements of the Universe

properties given to it by gravitation.”

– Might this fluid be what we call electricity?

“We have stated that it is capable of countless combinations.
What you call the electric and magnetic fluids are both
modifications of the one universal fluid. Properly speaking,
this fluid is a perfect and subtler matter that may be
considered as being independent of matter per se.”

Question 28:
Since spirit is something in and of itself, wouldn’t it be clearer
and less subject to confusion to label these two general elements
as “inert matter” and “intelligent matter”?

Answer:
“Words do not matter much to us. It is up to you to formulate
your language in a way that you can understand one another.
The disputes among you almost always arise because you cannot
agree on the meanings of the words you use. Your language is
incomplete regarding things that do not touch your senses.”

One obvious fact dominates all theories: we see matter, which is not
intelligent, and we see an intelligent principle that is independent
of matter; nonetheless, the origin of and connection between these
two are unknown to us. Whether they have a common origin and
necessary points of contact between them, and whether intelligence
has its own independent existence or is only a property or effect, as
some claim, or even whether it is an emanation of the Divinity –
this is all unknown to us. Matter and intelligence are distinct, as far
as we are concerned; thus, we regard them as being two principles
comprising the universe. Above these, however, we see an intelligence
dominating and governing all others, and it differs from them due to
its essential attributes: it is this supreme intelligence that we call God.
