The Spirit’s State of Confusion after Death

Question 163:
Upon leaving the body, is the soul immediately conscious of
itself?

Answer:
“Immediately is not the right word; it remains in a state of
confusion for some time.”

Question 164:
Do all spirits experience the confusion that follows the
separation of the soul and body to the same degree and for the
same amount of time?

Answer:
“No, it depends on how evolved they are. Those who are
already purified are almost immediately self-aware because
of their detachment from matter during corporeal life.
However, carnal individuals with impure consciences
retain the impression of matter much longer.”

Question 165:
Does an understanding of Spiritism have any influence on the
shorter or longer duration of this confusion?

Answer:
“It has a very considerable influence because the spirit
understood what its situation would be beforehand. The
practice of good and purity of conscience exerts the most
influence, however.”

At the moment of death, everything appears confused at first. The
soul needs some time to recognize itself; it feels dazed, like someone
waking out of a deep sleep, who tries to understand the situation. The
lucidity of its ideas and the memory of its past return as the influence
of the matter from which it has just freed itself is extinguished and the
sort of fog that had obscured its thoughts is dissipated.

The duration of the state of confusion following death varies
greatly: it may last a few hours, several months or even years. The
ones who experience it for the least amount of time are those who
have identified themselves with their future state during life because
they immediately understand their position.

This confusion presents particular aspects, depending on the
character of the individual and especially depending on the type
of death involved. In violent deaths: suicide, capital punishment,
accident, stroke, mortal wounds, etc., the spirit is surprised and
astonished; it does not believe itself to be dead. It stubbornly persists
in asserting that it has not died. Moreover, it sees its body lying
there and knows who it belongs to, but does not understand that
it is now separate. It seeks out loved ones and speaks to them, but
cannot understand why they cannot hear it. This illusion lasts until
its separation is complete, and only then does it realize its situation
and understand that it is no longer part of the world of the living.
This phenomenon is easy to explain. Surprised by its unforeseen
death, the spirit is stunned by the sudden change that has taken
place. It still believes that death is synonymous with destruction and
annihilation, and since it continues to think, see and hear, it does
not consider itself to be dead. This illusion is strengthened by the
fact that it finds itself in a body similar to the one it just left, and it
has not yet ascertained its ethereal nature. Instead, it presumes that
it is solid and compact like the other, and it is astonished when it
is pointed out that this body is not tangible. It is a phenomenon
similar to that of some inexperienced somnambulists who do not
believe that they are asleep.

They believe that sleep is synonymous with the suspension of the
faculties, and since they can see and think freely, they do not perceive
that they are sleeping. Even in cases where death has not occurred
unexpectedly, some spirits display this peculiarity. However, it
is more generalized among those who had not thought of dying
despite having been ill. This leads to the curious spectacle of spirits
who attend their own funeral as though it were someone else’s, and
who speak of it as though it in no way concerns them – until they
suddenly comprehend the truth.

There is nothing painful about the state of confusion following
death for moral individuals; they are calm and their perceptions are

those of a peaceful awakening. However, for those whose conscience
is not pure, it is full of anxiety and anguish.

In cases of collective death, it has been observed that all those who have
perished at the same time do not always see one another immediately.
In the confusion following death, each spirit goes its own way or
concerns itself only with those in whom it takes an interest.