The Soul

Question 134:
What is the soul?

Answer:
“An incarnate spirit.”

– What was the soul before its union with a body?

“A spirit.”

– Are souls and spirits therefore one and the same thing?

“Yes, souls are no more than spirits. Before uniting with a
body, the soul is one of the intelligent beings who populate
the invisible world, and it later temporarily assumes a
physical envelope in order to purify and enlighten itself.”

Question 135:
Do human beings possess something else besides a soul and body?

Answer:
“The link that unites the soul and the body.”

The Incarnation of Spirits

– What is the nature of this link?

“It is semi-material, i.e., half-way between the nature of
the spirit and that of the body; these two natures need it
in order to communicate with each other. It is through
this link that the spirit acts upon matter, and vice-versa.”

Human beings thus consist of three essential parts:

1) The body or material being, similar to that of the animals and
animated by the same vital principle;

2) The soul or incarnate spirit, which inhabits the body;

3) The perispirit or intermediary principle, a semi-material substance
that serves as the primary envelope of the spirit and unites the soul
with the body. These three together are like a fruit, which consists
of the seed, the flesh and the rind.

Question 136:
Is the soul independent of the vital principle?

Answer:
“The body itself is no more than an envelope, as we have
repeatedly stated.”

– Can the body exist without the soul?

“Yes. Nevertheless, when the body dies, the soul abandons
it. Previous to birth, there is no decisive union between
the soul and body. After this union is established, however,
only the death of the body can cut the bonds between the
two, enabling the soul to leave. Organic life may animate a
body that has no soul, but the soul cannot inhabit a body
that has no organic life.”

– What would our body be if it did not have a soul?

“A mass of flesh without intelligence; anything you might
want to call it except a human being.”

Question 137:
Can the same spirit incarnate into two different bodies at the
same time?

Answer:
“No. The spirit is indivisible and cannot animate two
different beings at the same time.” (See the chapters
on Bi-corporeality and Transfiguration in The Mediums’
Book)33

Question 138:
What about the opinion of those who regard the soul as being
the principle of material life?

Answer:
“It doesn’t concern us since it is only a matter of words.
Start by trying to understand each other.”

Question 139:
But certain spirits, and certain philosophers before them, have
defined the soul as being an animic spark that has emanated
from the Great Whole. Why the contradiction?

Answer:
“There is no contradiction; everything depends on the
meaning of the words. Why don’t you have one word for
each thing?”

The word soul is used to express very different things. Some call
the soul the principle of life, and in this sense it is correct to state
figuratively that the soul is an animic spark that has emanated from
the Great Whole. These last two words refer to the universal source
of the vital principle, of which each being absorbs a portion, and
which returns to the Whole after death. This in no way excludes the
idea of a moral being who is distinct and independent of matter,
and who preserves its own individuality. This being is also called the
soul, and according to this meaning one could say that the soul is an
incarnate spirit. In giving different definitions to the soul, the Spirits
have spoken according to their usages of the word and according to
the terrestrial ideas with which they were imbued to various degrees.
Because human language does not have one term for each idea and
is therefore inefficient, a large number of misunderstandings and
arguments have resulted. Hence the reason why the high order
spirits tell us that we should first of all try to understand each other
regarding the words we use.

Question 140:
What about the theory that the soul is subdivided into as
many parts as there are muscles, thus presiding over each of
the body’s functions?

Answer:
“That will also depend on the meaning attributed to the
word soul. This definition is correct if by it we mean the vital
fluid, but it is incorrect if we mean the incarnate spirit. We
have already stated that the spirit is indivisible: it transmits
movement to the organs through the intermediary fluid
without dividing itself up.”

– Nevertheless, there are spirits who have given this definition.

“Ignorant spirits may take the effect for the cause.”

The soul acts through the organs, which are animated by the vital
fluid distributed among them, and it acts more abundantly in those
organs that comprise the centers or focal points of movement. This
explanation, however, cannot be applied to the soul as the spirit that
inhabits the body during life and leaves it at death.

Question 141:
Is there anything correct in the opinion of those who think the
soul is outside the body and surrounds it?

Answer:
“The soul is not enclosed in the body like a caged bird. Rather,
it radiates and manifests outside of it like a light shining from
a glass globe or a sound vibrating out from a sonorous center.
So, in a certain sense it may be said that it is outside the
body; it is not an envelope of the body, however. The soul has
two envelopes: the first is light and subtle, which we call the
perispirit; the other is dense, material and heavy, which is the
body. The soul is the center of these two envelopes like a nut
in its shell, as we have already said.”

Question 142:
What about another theory holding that a child’s soul
continues to complete itself during each stage of life?

Answer:
“The spirit is only one: as whole in the child as it is in the
adult. As instruments of the soul’s manifestation, only the

bodily organs develop and complete themselves. This is
one more theory that takes the effect for the cause.”

Question 143:
Why don’t all spirits define the soul in the same way?

Answer:
“Not all spirits are equally enlightened regarding these
matters. There are spirits who are still limited, who do not
comprehend abstract ideas; they are like the children living
among you. There are also pseudo-learned spirits who make
a big show of words in order to assert themselves – another
similarity to your society. Furthermore, even enlightened
spirits may express themselves in different terms that have the
same meaning, especially regarding matters that your language
is incapable of clarifying; hence the need for the allegories and
comparisons that you unfortunately take literally.”

Question 144:
Then what is to be understood by the world soul?

Answer:
“The world soul is the universal principle of life and
intelligence from which individualities are born, but
frequently those who use this expression do not understand
it. The word soul is so flexible that everyone interprets it
according to their own imaginings. At times, it has even
been held that the earth itself has a soul, but by this we
must understand it to mean the assembly of devoted
spirits who direct your actions in the right direction when
you listen to them, and who are, in a way, the lieutenants
of God on your globe.”

Question 145:
Why have so many ancient and modern philosophers discussed
psychological science for so long without arriving at the truth?

Answer:
“These individuals were the precursors of the eternal
Spiritist Doctrine and have prepared the way for it. Being
human and therefore subject to error, they have mistaken
their own ideas for the light. These same errors, however,
have served to bring the truth to light through the pros
and cons of their doctrines. By the way, a comparative
study would enable you to understand that in the midst of
error there is great truth.”

Question 146:
Does the soul have a defined and circumscribed seat within
the body?

Answer:
“No, although it resides more particularly in the head
among great geniuses and all those who think much, and
in the heart of those who feel much, who dedicate all their
actions to humankind.”

– What should we think about the opinion of those who place
the soul in some vital center?

“One could say that the spirit more specially inhabits such
a part of your organism since all the sensations converge
on that point; but to place it in what may be considered
as the center of vitality would be to confuse it with the
vital fluid or principle. Nevertheless, one could say that
the seat of the soul may be more particularly found in
the organs that serve for manifesting the intellectual and
moral qualities.”