The Action of Spirits on the Phenomena of Nature

Question 536:
Are the great phenomena of nature  – those considered as
perturbations of the elements – due to fortuitous causes or do
they all have a providential purpose?

Answer:
“Everything has a reason for being and nothing occurs
without God’s permission.”

– Do these phenomena always have humankind as their
objective?

“Sometimes they occur for a reason directly related to
humankind, but most frequently they have no other
purpose than to reestablish the balance and harmony of
the physical forces of nature.”

– We understand perfectly well that God’s will is the primary
cause in these as in all things. But since we know that spirits
can in fact act upon matter and that they are agents of God’s
will, we would ask whether some among them might not
exert an influence over the elements in order to rouse, calm
or direct them.

“But that is obvious; it cannot be otherwise. God does not
act directly on nature, but has devoted agents on every
degree of the worlds’ scales.”

Question 537:
The mythology of the ancients is entirely based on Spiritist
ideas, with the difference that they regarded spirits as deities,
and they represented those gods or spirits as having special
attributes. Thus, some were in charge of the wind; others, the
lightning, while others presided over vegetation, etc. Is this
belief entirely without foundation?

Answer:
“It is entirely without foundation and far from the truth.”

– Along the same lines, are there spirits inhabiting the earth’s
interior, presiding over geological phenomena?

“Such spirits do not actually inhabit the earth, but
they preside over and direct its phenomena according
to their particular attributes. Someday, you will have
an explanation for all these phenomena and you will
comprehend them better.”

Question 538:
Do the spirits who preside over the phenomena of nature form
a special category in the spirit world? Are they separate beings,
or are they spirits who have been incarnated like us?

Answer:
“Who will be or who have been.”

– Do these spirits belong to the higher or lower orders of the
spirit hierarchy?

“That depends on whether their role is more material or
intelligent, or less so: some command; others execute.
Those who perform material functions are always of a
lower order among spirits, just as among human beings.”

Question 539:
In the production of certain phenomena  – storms, for
example – does a single spirit act, or do they gather en mass?

Answer:
“In enormous masses.”

Question 540:
Do the spirits who act upon the phenomena of nature do so
with full awareness and in virtue of their free will, or out of
an instinctive and unreasoning impulse?

Answer:
“Some in one way, others in the other. Let us make a
comparison: consider the myriads of animals that little
by little build up islands and archipelagos in the ocean.
Do you believe that there is no providential purpose in
this, and that this transformation of the surface of the
globe is not necessary for its overall harmony? Yet, all
this is accomplished by animals of the lowest degree
while they are providing for their own needs and without
perceiving that they are God’s instruments. In the same
way, the least advanced spirits are useful to the general
whole. While preparing for life, and before having full
awareness of their acts and free will, they act upon certain
phenomena in which they are the unwitting agents. At
first, they execute; later, when their intelligence is more
developed, they command and direct the matters of the
material world. Still later, they direct the things of the
moral world. Hence, everything is useful; everything
in nature is linked together, from the primitive atom
to the archangel, who also began as only an atom – an
admirable law of harmony, which your limited minds
cannot yet grasp in its entirety!”