Expiation and Repentance

Question 990:
Does repentance take place in the corporeal or the spirit state?

Answer:
“In the spirit state. But it may also take place in the corporeal
state when you clearly comprehend the difference between
good and evil.”

Question 991:
What is the consequence of repentance in the spirit state?

Answer:
“The spirit’s desire for a new incarnation in order to purify
itself. It comprehends the imperfections that have kept
it from being happy and it aspires to a new existence in
which it can expiate its wrongs.” (See nos. 332, 975)

Question 992:
What is the consequence of repentance in the corporeal state?

Answer:
“Advancement while in the present corporeal life – if one has
the time to mend one’s wrongs. Whenever your conscience
reproaches you or shows you an imperfection, you may
always improve yourselves.”

Question 993:
Aren’t there individuals who have an instinct for evil only and
who are incapable of repenting?

Answer:
“I have told you that the spirit must progress without
ceasing. Those who in this life have only an instinct for
evil will have an instinct for the good in another one, and
that is why they are reborn many times. All must advance
and reach the objective at their own pace, more quickly
or more slowly, according to their desire. Those who
only have an instinct for the good are already purified
because they might have had an instinct for evil in a prior
existence.” (See no. 894)

Question 994:
Do wicked individuals, who during their life did not recognize
their wrongs, always recognize them after death?

Answer:
“Yes, they always recognize them and suffer even more
because they regret all the evil they did or of which they were
the intentional cause. Nevertheless, repentance is not always
immediate. There are spirits who obstinately persist in doing
wrong in spite of their suffering; but sooner or later they will
see that they have taken an erroneous path and repentance
will follow. It is for their enlightenment that good spirits
work, and towards which you yourselves should work.”

Question 995:
Are there spirits who, although not wicked, are nonetheless
indifferent about their fate?

Answer:
“There are spirits who do not occupy themselves
with anything useful, keeping themselves in a state of
expectancy. They suffer in proportion to their inactivity,
however, and since everything must lead to progress, such
progress is realized through suffering.”

– Don’t they desire to shorten their suffering?

“Undoubtedly they do, but they lack the willpower for
what it would take to alleviate it. How many individuals
among you would rather die poor than work?”

Question 996:
Since spirits see the harm that results from their wrongs, how
is it that some aggravate their position and prolong their state
of imperfection by doing evil as spirits and turning people
aside from the path of the good?

Answer:
“Some spirits put off their repentance. Furthermore, a
spirit who repents can afterward still allow itself to be
drawn back onto the immoral path by spirits who are even
less evolved.” (See no. 971)

Question 997:
We sometimes see spirits who are notoriously imperfect, but
who are open to the good sentiments and prayers made on
their behalf. How is it that other spirits whom we might
believe are more enlightened show a callousness and cynicism
impossible to break?

Answer:
“Prayer is only effective in the case of spirits who repent.
Those who, driven by pride, revolt against God and
persist in their wrong-doings, multiplying them further
as unfortunate spirits do, cannot and never will receive
the benefits of prayer until the day the light of repentance
dawns on them.” (See no. 664)

We must not forget that after the death of their body, spirits are not
suddenly transformed. If their life was reprehensible, it was because
they were imperfect. Death does not change that by suddenly
turning them into perfect beings. They may persist in their errors,
their wrong ideas and their prejudices until they become enlightened
through study, reflection and suffering.

Question 998:
Is expiation accomplished in the corporeal state or in the
spirit state?

Answer:
“It is accomplished in the corporeal existence through
the trials the spirit must undergo, and in the spirit life
through the mental sufferings arising from its state of
imperfection.”

Question 999:
Is sincere repentance during life sufficient to extinguish a
spirit’s wrongs and enable it to merit God’s grace?

Answer:
“Repentance helps to improve the spirit, but the past must
nevertheless be expiated.”

– That being the case, what would be the consequences for a
criminal who said that since he was expiating his past then
there was no reason for him to have to repent?

“If he persists in the thought of evil, his expiation will be
all the longer and more painful.”

Question 1000:
Can we redeem our wrongs in the present life?

Answer:
“Yes, by making reparation for them. Do not suppose,
however, that you can redeem them through a few childish
privations or through donations after your death when you
no longer need your assets. God does not value a sterile
repentance, which is always easy and costs no more than
mourning by beating on one’s chest. The loss of a finger
in rendering a service effaces a greater number of wrongs
than mortifying one’s whole flesh for years without any
other purpose than one’s own self-interest. (See no. 726)

“Evil can only be atoned for by means of the good, and
reparation does not have any merit if it does not strike
human beings in their pride or their material interests.

“What good would it do on our behalf if after our death
we were to restore property which we acquired wrongly,
and which we had thoroughly enjoyed during life, but
which is now of no further use to us?

“What good would it do to be deprived of a few useless
and superfluous enjoyments if the evil we had done to
someone remained in place?

“Lastly, what good would it do to humble oneself before
God if we maintained our pride in dealing with others?”
(See nos. 720, 721)

Question 1001:
Is there any merit in ensuring that after our death the property
we have left behind will be put to good use?

Answer:
“Merit is not quite the right term, but it is always better
than doing nothing. Unfortunately, those who only give
after their death are usually more selfish than generous –
they want the honors of charitable acts without having to
practice them. Those who deprive themselves during life
have a double advantage: the merit of sacrifice and the
pleasure of witnessing the happiness of those whom they
have benefited. Selfishness, however, is always ready to
whisper that whatever you give away will deprive you of
your own enjoyment, and since selfishness speaks louder
than selflessness and charity, people hold on to their
possessions under the pretext that they are necessary for
satisfying their needs and the requirements of their position
in society. Pity those who do not know the pleasure of
giving, for they have really deprived themselves of one
of the purest and sweetest enjoyments of humankind. In
subjecting them to the trial of wealth – so slippery and
dangerous for their future – God has wished to give them
by way of compensation the happiness of generosity, which
they can enjoy right now in this world.” (See no. 814)

Question 1002:
What can be done when at their death individuals recognize
their wrongs but do not have the time remaining to make
amends? Is repentance enough in such a case?

Answer:
“Repentance hastens their rehabilitation but it does not
absolve them. Don’t they have the whole future ahead,
which will never be closed to them?”