The Soul after Death

Question 149:
What does the soul become at death?

Answer:
“It becomes a spirit again; i.e. it returns to the world of
spirits that it had left for a time.”

Question 150:
Does the soul preserve its individuality after death?

Answer:
“Yes, it never loses it. What would the soul be if it did not
preserve its individuality?”

– How does the soul preserve its individuality if it no longer
has a material body?

“It still has a fluid proper to it, which it draws from
its planet, and which retains the appearance of its last
incarnation: the perispirit. “

– Doesn’t the soul take anything else from this world?

“Nothing more than its memories and the desire to go
to a better world. These memories are full of sweetness
or bitterness, depending on how the soul has lived its
earthly life. The purer it is, the more it will comprehend
the futility of what it has left behind on earth.”

Question 151:
What about the opinion that the soul returns to the universal
whole after death?

Answer:
“Don’t all the spirits taken together make up a whole?
When you are in a group, you are an integral part of it,
and yet you still retain your own individuality.”

Question 152:
What evidence is there for the soul’s individuality after death?

Answer:
“Don’t you have such evidence through the communications
you receive? If you were not blind, you would see; if you
were not deaf, you would hear, because frequently a voice
speaks to you and reveals to you the existence of a being
outside yourselves.”

Those who think the soul returns to the universal whole at death are
wrong if they mean that it loses its individuality like a drop of water
falling into the ocean. Nevertheless, they are right if by universal
whole they mean the entire assemblage of incorporeal beings, of
which each soul or spirit is a member.

If souls were melded together into the universal whole, they would
possess only the qualities of the whole and nothing would distinguish
them from one another; they would have no intelligence or qualities
of their own. However, in all their communications with us, they
have revealed a consciousness of the self and a distinct will. The
infinite diversity they display under all aspects is evidence of their
individualization. If there were nothing after death except what is
called the Great Whole, absorbing all individualities, that whole
would have to be homogenous, and the communications received
from the invisible world would therefore all have to be identical. It

is obvious that we are dealing with distinct beings, for we meet good
and evil, knowledgeable and ignorant, happy and downcast beings
of all natures: joyful and sad, frivolous and serious, etc. Individuality
becomes even more obvious when these beings prove their identity
through unmistakable signs and verifiable personal details related to
their earthly lives. Furthermore, there can be no doubt about such
individuality when they manifest as apparitions. The individuality
of the soul has been taught theoretically as an article of faith, but
Spiritism makes it obvious, and to a certain extent, material.

Question 153:
In what sense should we understand the eternal life?

Answer:
“Only the life of the spirit is eternal; the life of the body
is transitory and temporary. When the body dies, the soul
returns to the eternal life.”

– Wouldn’t it be more correct to understand the eternal life as
that of the pure spirits, who no longer undergo trials because
they have finally attained perfection?

“That indeed represents eternal happiness, but it is all a
matter of words. You may call things whatever you want
as long as you understand the words you use.”