The Succession and Perfecting of the Races

Question 688:
At this moment, there are certain human races that are
obviously diminishing. Will a time come when they will have
completely disappeared from the earth?

Answer:
“Yes, but others will have taken their place, as others will
someday take yours.”

Question 689:
Are the human beings of today a new creation or are they the
perfected descendants of primitive beings?

Answer:
“They are the same spirits. They have returned to perfect
themselves in new bodies, but they are still far from
perfection. Thus, the present human race, which, through
its growth, tends to invade the whole earth and to replace
the races that are dying out, will also go through its own
period of decrease and extinction. Other more perfected
races will replace it. These will have descended from the
present ones, just as the civilized human beings of the
present day have descended from the brutes and primitives
of early eras.”

Question 690:
From a purely physical point of view, are the bodies of the
present race a special creation, or have they evolved from more
primitive bodies by way of reproduction?

Answer:
“The origin of the human race is lost in the night of time,
but since all belong to one great human family, whatever
the primitive roots of each race were, they have since been
able to mix with one another and produce new types.”

Question 691:
From a physical standpoint, what is the distinctive and
dominant characteristic of primitive races?

Answer:
“The development of brute strength at the expense of
intellectual prowess. The opposite is occurring nowadays:
humans act more through their intelligence than through
physical strength; and yet, they accomplish a hundred
times more because they have placed the forces of nature
at their service, which the animals cannot do.”

Question 692:
Is the improvement of animal and vegetable species through
science contrary to natural law? Wouldn’t it be more in
conformance with that law to allow things to follow their
normal course?

“Everything must be done to arrive at perfection. Humans
themselves are an instrument that God uses as a means for
accomplishing the divine ends. Since perfection is the goal
toward which nature tends, to favor such perfection is to
correspond to those ends.”

– But in their efforts to improve various species, humans
are generally motivated by a personal sentiment that has no
other goal than to increase their own enjoyments. Doesn’t this
diminish their merit?

“What does it matter that their merits are void provided
progress is made? It is up to them to render their labor
praiseworthy through their intention. Besides, by
means of such labor they exercise and develop their
intelligence, and it is from this aspect that they derive
the greatest benefit.”