Disappointments. Ungratefulness. Broken Affections

Question 937:
Aren’t the disappointments caused by ingratitude and by the
fragility of the ties of friendships also a source of bitterness for
the human heart?

Answer:
“Yes, but we have already taught you to feel pity for
ungrateful and disloyal friends. They will be unhappier
than you are. Ingratitude is the child of selfishness and
selfish individuals will sooner or later encounter hearts as
hard as their own. Just think of all those who have done
more good than you, who are more worthy than you, and
who have been repaid with ingratitude. Remember that
during his life Jesus himself was scoffed at, despised, and
treated as a villain and an impostor. So do not be surprised
when the same happens to you. Let the good you have
done be your reward in this world and do not worry about
what those who have benefited from it say. Ingratitude
serves to test your persistence in doing good. It will be
credited to you, and those who have been thoughtless
toward you will be punished to the same extent that they
have been ungrateful.”

Question 938:
Couldn’t the disappointments caused by ingratitude harden
the heart and make it insensitive?

Answer:
“That would be unfortunate because persons with heart,
as you say, will always be happy for the good they have
done. They know that if the good they have done is not
remembered in the present life, it will be in another, and
the ingrate will then feel shame and remorse.”

– But this knowledge will not prevent their heart from feeling
hurt. Mightn’t this lead them to think they would be happier
if they were less sensitive?

“Yes, if they were to prefer a selfish happiness, a very sad
happiness! However, if they know that the ungrateful friends
who desert them are unworthy of their friendship, and that
they have been mistaken about them, they will no longer
regret losing them. Later on, they will find friends who are
more understanding. You should pity those who treat you
in a way that you do not deserve, because they will suffer a
sad recompense. Don’t let yourselves be afflicted by them: it
is a means for you to raise yourselves above them.”

Nature has given humans the need to love and be loved. One of the
greatest enjoyments granted to them on earth is in their meeting with
mutually attuned hearts. Nature thus grants them a foretaste of the
happiness waiting for them in the world of perfected spirits, where
all is love and benevolence – a happiness that is refused to the selfish.