Spiritism’s Influence on Progress

Question 798:
Will Spiritism become a common belief or will it only be
accepted by a few?

Answer:
“It will certainly become a common belief and will mark
a new era in the history of humankind, for it belongs
to nature itself. In fact, the time has come in which it
must take its place among the other branches of human
knowledge. It will nevertheless have to withstand great
struggles  – more against personal interests than against
conviction – because you must not ignore the fact that
there are persons interested in fighting it, some out of
self-centeredness, others from purely material motives. Its
opponents, however, will become more and more isolated
and will finally be forced to think like the others, lest they
make themselves look foolish.”

Ideas are only transformed over time, never suddenly. They weaken
from generation to generation, and end up disappearing along with
those who have professed them, who are replaced by other individuals
imbued with new principles, as is the case with political ideas in
particular. Look at paganism. There are few today who profess the
religious ideas of pagan times; nevertheless, many centuries after
the advent of Christianity, they have left behind traces that only a
complete renewal of humankind can erase. It will be the same with
Spiritism. It has made considerable progress, but for two or three
generations there will still be a phenomenon of incredulity that only
time will erase. However, its forward progress will be more rapid than
was the progress of Christianity because Christianity itself has opened
the paths and has provided support for Spiritism. Christianity had to
destroy; Spiritism has only to build.

Question 799:
In what way can Spiritism contribute to progress?

Answer:
“By destroying materialism – one of the sores of society – it
enables people to comprehend where their true interests lie.
Since the future life is no longer veiled by doubt, men and
women will better understand that they can ensure their
future based on the present. Destroying the prejudices of
sect, caste and color, Spiritism teaches them about the great
solidarity that must unite them as brothers and sisters.”

Question 800:
Shouldn’t we perhaps fear that Spiritism may not be able to defeat
humans’ indifference and their attachment to material things?

Answer:
“To suppose that any cause could act as some kind of magic
spell to transform humans would be to know very little
about them. Individuals’ ideas are modified little by little
and generations are needed to completely erase old habits.
Transformation, therefore, can only be realized with time,
gradually, step by step. With each new generation a part
of the veil has been lifted, and Spiritism has now come
to remove it once and for all. However, even if it had the
effect of correcting the defects of only one person, it would
be a step for that person and therefore a great good since
that first step would make further ones easier.”

Question 801:
Why haven’t the Spirits taught from the earliest times what
they are teaching today?

Answer:
“You do not teach to children the same things you teach to
adults, just as you do not give newborns food they cannot
digest. Each thing has its own time. The Spirits taught
many things that humans distorted or did not understand,
but which they are now capable of comprehending. Even
though their teaching was incomplete, they prepared the
soil to receive the seed which is now about to bear fruit.”

Question 802:
Since Spiritism must mark a step in the progress of
humankind, why don’t the Spirits speed up this progress
through manifestations that are so widespread and patent
that they could lead the most incredulous to believe?

Answer:
“You desire miracles, but God has sown so-called miracles
by the handful right under your feet; yet, you still have
people who deny them. Did Christ himself convince
his contemporaries by the wonders he performed? Even
today, don’t you see those who deny the most obvious facts
occurring under their very eyes? Aren’t there those who
would not believe even if they did see them? No, it is not
by miracles that God guides humankind. Out of divine
goodness, God wishes to leave to it the merit of being
convinced through reason.”