Perceptions, Sensations, and Sufferings of Spirits

Question 237:
Once in the world of spirits, does the soul still have the
perceptions it had in this life?

Answer:
“Yes, and others that it did not have because its body was
like a veil that obscured them. Intelligence is a natural
attribute of the spirit, but it is expressed more freely when
it is unshackled.”

Question 238:
Are the perceptions and understanding of spirits unlimited?
In other words, do they know everything?

Answer:
“The nearer they approach perfection, the more they
know. If they are high order spirits, they know much. Low
order spirits are more or less ignorant on all subjects.”

Question 239:
Do spirits comprehend the beginning of things?

Answer:
“That too depends on how evolved and purified they are.
Low order spirits do not know any more than humans.”

Question 240:
Do spirits perceive time as we do?

Answer:
“No, and that is what causes you to misunderstand us
when it comes to setting dates or epochs.”

Spirits live outside of time as we know it; for them, duration of time
practically does not exist. The centuries that are so long to us are to
them only instants that disappear into eternity, in the same way that
the unevenness of the ground would fade and disappear to someone
high in space.

Question 241:
Do spirits have a more correct and precise idea of the present
than we do?

Answer:
“More so or less so, like someone who sees clearly has a
more correct idea of things than a blind person. Spirits see

what you do not see, and they judge differently than you;
but once again, it depends on how evolved they are.”

Question 242:
How do spirits have knowledge about the past? Is such
knowledge unlimited for them?

Answer:
“When we concern ourselves with it, the past is present,
precisely in the same way you remember something that
has impressed you during your exile. However, since we are
no longer hampered by the material veil that clouds your
minds, we remember things that have disappeared from
your memory. Spirits, however, do not know everything,
especially their own creation.”

Question 243:
Do spirits know the future?

Answer:
“Again, it depends on how purified they are. Most of the
time, they may glimpse it, but they do not always have
permission to reveal it. When they do see it, it appears to
them to be the present. A spirit sees the future more clearly
the more it approaches God. After death, the soul sees and
takes in its past migrations at a glance, but it cannot see
what God has in store for it. For that, it is necessary for it
to have become one with God after many lives.”

– Do spirits who have reached perfection possess complete
knowledge of the future?

“Complete is not the right term because God alone is
sovereign; no one can equal God.”

Question 244:
Do spirits see God?

Answer:
“Only high order spirits see and understand God; low
order spirits feel and intuit God.”

– When a low order spirit says that a thing is forbidden or
permitted to it by God, how does it know that the order has
actually come from God?

“It does not see God but senses the divine sovereignty,
and when something must not be done or when a word
must not be spoken, it receives a sort of intuition, a secret
warning, which keeps it from proceeding. Don’t you
yourselves have presentiments that are like secret warnings
to do or not to do something? The same happens with us,
but to a higher degree; you should understand that, since
the essence of spirits is more subtle than yours, we can
more easily receive divine warnings.”

– Is the order transmitted by God directly or through other
spirits?

“It does not come from God directly, because to
communicate with God directly one must deserve it.
God transmits divine orders through spirits who are more
evolved in purification and instruction.”

Question 245:
Is spirits’ sight circumscribed as it is in corporeal beings?

Answer:
“No, it resides within the entire spirit.”

Question 246:
Do spirits need light in order to see?

Answer:
“They see with their own light, without the need for
outside light. There is no darkness for them, except that in
which they may find themselves due to expiation.”

Question 247:
Do spirits need to move about in order to see in two
different places? For instance, can they see what is happening
simultaneously in two hemispheres of the globe?

Answer:
“Since spirits travel at the speed of thought, we can say that
they see everywhere all at once. Their thought can radiate
and be directed to many points at the same time, but this
faculty depends on their purity; the less pure they are, the
more limited their sight. Only the high order spirits can
see everything as a whole.”

Among spirits, the faculty of sight is inherent to their nature and
permeates their whole being like light in a luminous object. It is a
type of universal lucidity extending to everything, simultaneously
embracing space, time and things, and for which there are no
darkness or material obstacles. One should understand that it must
be this way because in human beings sight functions through an
organ that receives the light; thus, without light they remain in
darkness. In spirits, however, since the faculty of sight is an inherent
attribute independent of any outside agent, sight does not depend
on light. (See: Ubiquity, no. 92)

Question 248:
Do spirits see things as distinctly as we do?

Answer:
“More distinctly, for their sight penetrates what yours
cannot. Nothing obscures it.”

Question 249:
Do spirits perceive sounds?

Answer:
“Yes, and they also perceive those that your limited senses
cannot.”

– Is the hearing faculty, like that of sight, in their whole being?

“All perceptions are attributes of the spirit and are part
of its being. When it is clothed with a material body,
perceptions only arrive through organic channels. In the
state of freedom, however, they are no longer localized.”

Question 250:
Since the perceptions are attributes of the spirit itself, can it
stop using them?

Answer:
“A spirit only sees and hears what it wants to; at least this
is generally the case, especially for more evolved spirits,
because less evolved ones frequently must hear and see
what may be useful for their improvement, whether they
want to or not.”

Question 251:
Are spirits sensitive to music?

Answer:
“Do you mean your music? What is that kind of music when
compared to celestial music, that harmony of which no one on
earth can have an idea? One is to the other what the primitive chant
is when compared with a soft melody. Nevertheless, ordinary spirits
may take a certain pleasure in listening to your music because they
are not yet able to appreciate anything more sublime. For spirits,
music has infinite charm due to their highly developed sensitive
qualities. Of course, I am referring to celestial music, which is
everything the spiritual imagination can conceive of as the most
beautiful and delicate of all.”

Question 252:
Are spirits sensitive to the beauties of nature?

Answer:
“The beauties of nature on different globes are so diverse
that they are far from knowing about all of them. Yes,
they are sensitive to them according to their aptitudes for
appreciating and comprehending them. Evolved spirits
enjoy the beauties of the whole, before which the beauties
of detail fade, so to speak.”

Question 253:
Do spirits experience our physical needs and sufferings?

Answer:
“They know about them, for they have endured them, but
they do not experience them physically as you do, because
they are spirits.”

Question 254:
Do spirits feel fatigue and the need for rest?

Answer:
“They cannot feel fatigue as you understand it, and therefore
they do not need corporeal rest, because they do not possess
organs in which the energies must be restored. However,
spirits do rest, meaning they do not remain in a state of
constant activity. They do not act in a physical way, because
their action is entirely intellectual and their rest is entirely
mental. There are moments when their thought decreases
in activity and is no longer directed toward any object in
particular. This is a true repose for them, but it cannot be
compared to that of the body. The kind of fatigue that
spirits can experience is in proportion to how evolved they
are; the more purified they are, the less rest they need.”

Question 255:
When a spirit says that it is suffering, what is the nature of
such suffering?

Answer:
“Mental anguish, which tortures it more acutely than
physical suffering.”

Question 256:
Why do some spirits complain about the cold or heat?

Answer:
“It is a remembrance of what they suffered during their
life, a feeling as painful as the reality itself. Frequently, they
use these expressions to express their situation. When they
remember their body, they experience a sensation similar
to when you take off a heavy coat – immediately afterwards
you continue to feel its weight on your shoulders.”