Angels and Demons

Question 128:
Do the beings we call angels, archangels and seraphim form
a special category that is different in nature from that of the
other spirits?

“No, these are the pure spirits: those at the highest degree
of the hierarchy and inwardly perfect in every way.”

The word angel usually rouses the idea of moral perfection; however,
it is frequently applied to all beings – good or evil – that are beyond
the human sphere. We say a good angel, a bad angel, an angel of light,
an angel of darkness. In this case, the term is synonymous with spirit
and is used here to refer to the good beings.

Question 129:
Have the angels also passed up through all of the degrees?

“They have passed up through all of them, but as we have
already said: some accepted their mission without grumbling,
and thus were able to arrive more quickly; others took a longer
or shorter amount of time to reach perfection.”

Question 130:
If the opinion holding that there are beings that were created perfect
and superior to all others from the start is erroneous, how does one
explain their presence in the traditions of nearly all cultures?

“You need to understand that your world has not existed
from all eternity, and that long before it existed there were
already spirits of the highest degree; hence, people assume
they have always been perfect.”

Question 131:
Are there demons in the usual sense of the word?

“If there were demons, they would nevertheless be
the work of God. But would God be just and good in
creating unfortunate beings that are eternally turned
towards evil? If there are demons, they reside on your
less evolved world and on other similar ones: they are the
hypocritical men and women who portray a just God as
an evil and vindictive one. They are those who imagine
they can please God by the abominable behaviors they
commit in the divine name.”

Only in its modern meaning does the word demon imply the idea
of evil spirits, because the Greek word daimon, from which it
derives, means genius or intelligence and applies to all good or evil
incorporeal beings without distinction.

According to the common meaning of the word, demons are
essentially malevolent entities, but like everything else they would
have to be one of God’s creations. God is supremely just and good,
and could not have created beings predisposed to evil by their very
nature and condemned for eternity. On the other hand, if they were
not one of God’s works, they would be eternal like God, in which
case there would be many sovereign powers.

The first condition for every doctrine is that it be logical; therefore,
in its absolute meaning the doctrine of demons lacks this essential
point. In the beliefs of less evolved cultures that do not understand
the attributes of God, it is conceivable that alongside their evil deities
they also believe in the existence of demons. Nevertheless, for those
who accept the goodness of God as an attribute par excellence, it
would negate the divine goodness and be illogical and contradictory
to suppose that God would have created beings dedicated to evil
and destined to indulge in it forever.32 Proponents of demons find
support in the words of Christ, and we will certainly not contest
the authority of his teachings – we would like to see them more
in individuals’ hearts than on their lips. But can they be certain
of the meaning he attributed to the word demon? After all, do we
not know that the allegorical form is one of the characteristics of
his language? Should everything contained in the Gospels be taken
literally? We need no further proof beyond this passage:

“Immediately after those days of affliction, the sun shall be darkened;
the moon shall not give its light; the stars shall fall from heaven, and
the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. Verily I say unto you, this

32 In the book Heaven and Hell, pt. 1, chap IX, Kardec deals at length with the Church’s traditional
view that the demons and Satan were formerly a group of angels of light who subsequently
rebelIed against God, fell from grace and turned to evil. Here, the author is simply concerned
with presenting a brief sketch of the Spiritist view of what demons in fact are. – Tr.

generation shall not pass away before all these things are fulfilled.”
Have we not seen the form of the biblical text contradicted by
science where it refers to the creation and movement of the earth?
Could it not be the same regarding certain figurative expressions
employed by Christ, who had to speak according to the time and
region in which he found himself? Christ could not have consciously
made an erroneous statement. Therefore, if in his words there are
things that seem to contradict reason it is either because we have
not understood them or because we have wrongly interpreted them.

Humans have treated demons the same as they have treated angels.
Just as they have believed in the existence of beings perfect from all
eternity, they have also taken the least evolved spirits as beings who
will be evil forever. The word demon should therefore be understood
as referring to impure spirits, who often are no better than the beings
normally designated by that name, but with this difference: their state
is only temporary. They are the imperfect spirits who protest against
their trials, and as a result they will have to endure them for a long
time. Nevertheless, they will finally arrive at perfection after having
made the decision to do so. We might accept the term demon with
this restriction, but because it is generally understood according to its
exclusive meaning nowadays, it could lead to error and give credence
to the belief in the existence of beings created especially for evil.

As for Satan, it is obvious that he is the personification of evil in
allegorical form because it is impossible to believe in a malevolent being
who fights on par against the Divinity, and whose sole concern is to
contravene God’s designs. Since humans need images and figures to
impress their imagination, they have depicted incorporeal beings with
material forms, endowed with attributes that portray their qualities or
defects. Thus, in wishing to personify Time, the ancients pictured it
as an old man with a scythe and an hour-glass. In this case, it would
have been contrary to common sense to portray Time as a youth. The
same was true of the allegories of Fortune, Truth, etc. In modern times,
humans represent the angels or pure spirits as radiant beings with white
wings, symbolizing purity, while they portray Satan with horns, claws
and other bestial attributes, symbolizing the passions. Common folk,
who are prone to take things literally, see real entities in these symbols
just as they formerly regarded Saturn as the allegory of Time.