Materialism

Question 147:
Why are anatomists, physiologists and, in general, most of
those who delve into the natural sciences frequently led into
materialism?

Answer:
“Physiologists judge everything by what they see. Because of
pride, humans imagine they know everything and cannot admit
that something could possibly be beyond their understanding.
Their own science thus makes them presumptuous. They
think nature can hide nothing from them.”

Question 148:
Isn’t it odd that materialism is a consequence of studies that
should, on the contrary, show humankind the superiority of
the intelligence governing the world? Should we therefore
conclude that such studies are dangerous?

Answer:
“It is not true that materialism is a consequence of such
studies. Rather, it is people who draw a false conclusion
from them, for they can abuse even the very best of
everything. Moreover, nothingness troubles them more
than they would have you believe, and high-minded
individuals are almost always more boastful than brave.
Most of them are materialists because they have nothing
available to fill the void of the abyss that has opened before
them. However, throw them a life preserver and they will
eagerly grab onto it.”

It is an aberration of the intelligence that leads some to see nothing
in organic beings but the action of matter as the basis of all our
actions. They see nothing in the human body except an electrical
apparatus and they have not studied the mechanism of life except
in the functioning of the organs. They have seen life extinguished
many times by a ruptured artery, but they perceive nothing except
that artery. They have tried to discern whether or not there might
be something else, but they have found nothing but inert matter.
Moreover, since they have not seen the soul escape or been able to
capture it, they have concluded that everything rests in the properties
of matter, and thus, after death, the mind is reduced to nothingness.
This would be a sad conclusion if it were true, because then good
and evil would have no meaning. People would be justified in
thinking only of themselves and in placing the satisfaction of material
pleasures above everything else. Social ties would be broken and the
holiest affections would be destroyed forever. Fortunately, such ideas
are far from being the rule; one could even say that they are very
circumspect, composed of nothing more than individual opinions
and nowhere erected as a doctrine. A society founded on such a basis
would contain its own seeds of dissolution and its members would
tear each other to pieces like wild animals.

Humans instinctively hold to the conviction that things do not end
for them once life is over – they abhor the idea of nothingness.
In vain they rebel against the idea of a future life, and when the
supreme moment arrives, there are only a few who do not ask what
will become of them, because the idea of leaving life behind forever
is too painful. Who indeed could indifferently face absolute and
eternal separation from everything that has been loved? Who could
watch without terror the immense abyss of nothingness opening
before them, ready to swallow forever all their faculties and all their
hopes, and at the same time say, “That’s it! After me there’s nothing,
nothing but nothingness; everything is gone without an appeal. A
few days from now and any remembrance of me will be gone from
the memory of those surviving me and there will be no trace of my
passage on the earth. Even the good I have done will be forgotten
by the ingrates I’ve served and there is nothing to compensate me
for this, no prospect except my body being devoured by worms!”

Is there not something horrifying and chilling in this picture?
Religion teaches us that it cannot be like this and reason confirms
it, but a vague and undefined future existence brings nothing to
satisfy our love of the pragmatic. This is what has engendered doubt
in so many. It is correct to believe we have a soul, but what is it?
Does it have any kind of form or appearance? Is it a limited or
undefined being? Some say it is a breath of God; others say it is a
spark, while still others state that it is part of the Great Whole, the
principle of life and intelligence. But what does all this offer us?
What does having a soul matter to us if after death it will be merged
with the immensity like drops of water in the ocean? Is losing our
individuality not the same as nothingness? It is also said that the soul
is immaterial. However, an immaterial object cannot have defined
proportions, and so for us it is the same as nothingness. Religion
also teaches us that we shall be happy or unhappy according to the
good or evil we have done. But what is the happiness that awaits us
in the heart of God? Is it blissfulness, an eternal contemplation with
no other concern than singing praises to the Creator? And are the
flames of hell a reality or only a symbol? The Church itself generally
understands them in the latter sense. What then are the sufferings
of hell? Where is this place of punishment? In short, what do we actually do and what do we actually see in that other world that
waits for each one of us?

It is usually stated that no one has ever returned to give us an
account of what exists “over there”. That, however, is an error,
and Spiritism’s mission is precisely to enlighten us regarding that
future, to enable us to see and touch it to a certain extent, no
longer through reason only but through actual phenomena also.
Thanks to spirit communications, the matter no longer involves
pure conjecture, nor is it solely a probability that each one paints at
will, or something that poets embellish with their fictions or dress
up in allegorical images that seduce us. Instead, it is a reality that
has shown its face to us, in that actual beings from beyond the grave
have come to tell us about their situation there and what they do
there. They have allowed us to watch (so to speak) the events of
their new life, thereby showing us the inevitable fate reserved for
us according to our own merits or wrongs. Is there anything antiChristian in this? Quite the contrary, since disbelievers have found
faith as a result and the lukewarm have enjoyed a renewal of zeal
and confidence. Hence, Spiritism is Christianity’s most powerful
aid. If such is the case, it is because God has allowed it. God enables
it to reanimate our wavering hopes and lead us onto the path of the
good through hope for the future.