The Limit of Labor. Rest

Question 682:
Since rest is needed after labor, isn’t rest therefore a law of
nature?

Answer:
“Absolutely. Rest serves to restore the strength of the
body; it is also needed to give a little more freedom to the
intelligence, which must raise itself above matter.”

Question 683:
What is the limit of labor?

Answer:
“The limit of one’s strength; however, in this regard, God
leaves people free to decide what their limit is.”

Question 684:
What is to be thought of those who abuse their authority by
imposing too much work on their subordinates?

Answer:
“It is one of the worst things they could do. All who
have the power of command are responsible for any
excessive work they impose on their subordinates
since if they do so, they transgress the law of God.”
(See no. 273)

Question 685:
Do humans have the right to retire in old age?

Answer:
“Yes. None are required to labor beyond their ability to
do so.”

– But what resources do aging people have available if they
must earn a living but cannot?

“The strong should work for the weak. In the absence of a
family, society should replace it. That is the law of charity.”

It is not enough to tell people they must work; it is also necessary
for those who make their living from their labor to actually be
able to find employment, but this does not always happen.
Whenever the lack of available work is widespread, it assumes
the proportions of a calamity, much like a famine. Economic
science seeks a remedy in the balance between production and
consumption, but this balance – supposing that it is possible –
will always experience cycles, and during such phases workers
must still make a living. There is an element that has not been
sufficiently pondered, but without which economic science is
nothing more than theory: education; not intellectual education
but moral education; not moral education through books, but
moral education that consists in the art of forming character;
moral education that creates habits because education is the sum
of acquired habits. When one considers the mass of individuals
who are daily thrown into the torrent of the population, without
principles, without restraints and handed over to their own
instincts, can we wonder at the disastrous consequences? When
the art of education is recognized, understood and practiced,
all individuals the world over will follow the habits of order and
forethought for themselves and their dependents. They will respect
whatever is respectable, and will have habits that will enable them
to less painfully endure unavoidable adverse days. Disorder and
lack of forethought are two sores that only a sound education can
heal. That is the starting point, the real element of well-being,
the guarantee of security for all.
