Sympathies and Antipathies among Spirits. Eternal Halves

Question 291:
Besides a general sympathy46 that results from various
similarities, are there special affections among spirits?

46 See the footnotes to nos. 211 and 213 for the definitions of sympathy and sympathetic in
this context – Tr.

“Yes, just as among humans; however, the link that unites
spirits is stronger in the absence of the body because they
are no longer exposed to the vicissitudes of the passions.”

Question 292:
Is there hatred among spirits?

Answer:
“There is no hatred except among impure spirits, and these
are the ones who sow enmity and dissensions amongst you.”

Question 293:
Will two beings who were enemies on earth retain their
resentment in the spirit world?

Answer:
“No, usually they will understand that their hatred was
senseless and its motive childish. Only imperfect spirits
retain a sort of animosity until they are purified. If it was
nothing more than a material interest that had separated
them, they will no longer think about it no matter how little
dematerialized they are. If there is no antipathy between
them, and if the cause of their dissension no longer exists,
they can meet each other again with pleasure.”

Exactly like two schoolboys who, having reached the age of reason,
realize the childishness of their infantile quarrels and no longer
hold a grudge.

Question 294:
Is the remembrance of the wrongs that two individuals have
committed against each other an obstacle to their sympathy?

Answer:
“Yes, it makes them keep their distance from each other.”

Question 295:
What sentiment do those whom we have wronged in this
world experience after death?

Answer:
“If they are good, they forgive you according to your
repentance. If they are evil, they may hold on to their
resentment and at times even pursue you in another
existence. God can allow this as a chastisement.”

Question 296:
Are spirits’ personal affections susceptible to change?

“No, because they cannot be mistaken about each other;
they can no longer deceive each other. They no longer wear the
mask behind which hypocrites hide themselves and that is why
their affections are unchangeable when they are pure spirits.
The love that unites them is a source of supreme bliss.”

Question 297:
Does the affection that two beings had for each other on earth
always continue in the spirit world?

Answer:
“Yes, of course, if it is based on true sympathy; however, if
physical attraction has had more influence than sympathy,
it will cease with the cause. Affections among spirits are
more solid and lasting than on earth because they are
not subject to the whims of material interests and selfcenteredness.”

Question 298:
Are souls who must get together predestined for such a union from
their origin, and does each one of us have, in some part of the
universe, “our other half”, whom we will someday inevitably join?

Answer:
“No, there is no particular and predestined union
between two souls. Unity exists among all spirits, but
in different degrees, according to the order they occupy,
i.e. according to their degree of purification. The greater
their purification, the more united they are. All the ills of
humankind are born from discord; concord gives rise to
complete happiness.”

Question 299:
In what sense should we understand the term “other half”,
which certain spirits use to designate sympathetic spirits?

Answer:
“The expression is incorrect. If one spirit were another
spirit’s other half, it would be incomplete when separate
from the other.”

Question 300:
When two perfectly sympathetic spirits are united, will they
remain so throughout eternity, or can they separate and unite

with other spirits?

“All spirits are mutually united. I am referring to those who
have already reached perfection. In less evolved spheres,
after a spirit has improved itself, it no longer has the same
sympathy for those whom it has left behind.”

Question 301:
Are two sympathetic spirits each other’s complement or is such
sympathy the result of perfect affinity?

Answer:
“The sympathy that attracts one spirit to another is the
result of the perfect harmony of their tendencies and
instincts. If one of them were necessary to complete the
other, it would lose its individuality.”

Question 302:
Does the affinity needed for perfect sympathy consist only in a
similarity of thoughts and sentiments, or does it also consist in
a uniformity of acquired knowledge?

Answer:
“It consists in the degree of their evolution.”

Question 303:
Could spirits who are not sympathetic today become more so later?

Answer:
“Yes, all will be someday. Thus, when a spirit who today
inhabits a certain less evolved sphere is perfected, it will
reach the sphere where the other dwells. Their reunion will
occur more quickly, however, if the more evolved spirit has
remained at a standstill because it has poorly borne the
trials to which it submitted itself.”

– May two sympathetic spirits cease to be sympathetic?

“Certainly, if one of them is idle.”

The theory of “eternal halves” is an image that represents the union
of two sympathetic spirits. It is an expression used even in ordinary
parlance and must not be taken literally. Spirits who have used it
certainly do not belong to the highest order. The sphere of their ideas
is necessarily limited, and they express their thought through the terms
they used in corporeal life. We must reject this idea of two spirits created
for each other, who must someday be inevitably reunited in eternity
after having remained separated for a more or less long span of time.