Childhood

Question 379:
Is the spirit who animates the body of a child as developed as
the spirit of an adult?

Answer:
“Maybe more so if it is more evolved. Only its imperfect
organs keep it from fully manifesting itself. It must act
according to the instrument that serves it.”

Question 380:
In a very young child, and despite the obstacle that the
imperfection of its organs imposes on its ability to freely
manifest itself, does the spirit think as a child or as an adult?

Answer:
“While a child, it is natural that the as-yet undeveloped
organ of intelligence cannot provide it with all the intuition
of an adult. Its intelligence is therefore quite limited until
age matures its reason. The confusion accompanying
incarnation does not cease suddenly at birth, but only
dissipates gradually with the development of the organs.”

An observation supports this response: the dreams of a child do not
have the character of the dreams of an adult. Their object is almost
always childish, which is an indication of the nature of the spirit’s
preoccupations.

Question 381:
With the death of the child, does the spirit immediately regain
its former vigor?

Answer:
“It should, since it has been disencumbered from its physical
envelope. Nevertheless, it does not regain its former lucidity
until the separation is complete, that is, until there is no
connection between the spirit and the body at all.”

Question 382:
Does the incarnate spirit suffer from the constraint imposed
by the imperfection of its organs during childhood?

Answer:
“No. Childhood is a necessity. It is natural and corresponds
to the designs of Providence. It is a time of repose for the spirit.”

Question 383:
What is the usefulness of a spirit having to go through
childhood?

Answer:
“A spirit incarnates in order to perfect itself. During
childhood it is more accessible to the impressions it receives,
and which may assist in its progress. Persons in charge of its
education should contribute towards this goal.”

Question 384:
Why are a child’s first expressions those of crying?

Answer:
“To incite the mother’s interest and ensure the care it
needs. Don’t you understand that if it only expressed joy
while still unable to speak, few would be concerned about
its needs? Therefore, you ought to admire the wisdom of
Providence in everything.”

Question 385:
What is the reason for the change that occurs in its character
at a certain age, particularly upon leaving adolescence? Is it
the spirit that changes?

Answer:
“It is because the spirit recaptures its true nature and
reveals who it really was prior to its present incarnation.
You do not know the secrets that children conceal behind
their innocence. You do not know what they are, what
they have been or what they will be; nevertheless, you love
and cherish them as though they were a part of you. This
happens to such a degree that the love of a mother for
her child is reputed to be the greatest love that one being
may have for another. Why do even strangers feel sweet
affection and display tender benevolence toward a child?
Do you know? No? Well, I will explain it to you.

“Children are beings whom God has sent into a new
existence. So that God is not accused of excessive severity,
God gives them all the appearances of innocence. Even
in children of an evil nature, their misdeeds are covered
up because they are unaware of the quality of their acts.

However, this innocence does not truly reflect their state
of advancement in relation to what they previously were.
In reality, it is a picture of what they ought to be, and if
they are not, the blame falls on them alone.

“Nevertheless, it is not merely for the children’s sake
that God gives them such an appearance; it is also and
especially for their parents, whose love is necessary in their
fragility. Such love would be extraordinarily weakened
if the parents were faced with a quarrelsome and badtempered character. On the other hand, supposing their
children to be good and gentle, parents give them all their
affection and surround them with the tenderest care.
However, when children no longer need the protection
and assistance that has been given to them for fifteen or
twenty years, their true and individual character emerges
in all its nakedness. Their character remains good if it was
fundamentally good in the first place, but it will always
display nuances that were hidden during early childhood.

“You can see that God’s ways are always the best, and that
when one has a pure heart, they are easily explained.

“In fact, ponder the possibility that the spirit of the child
who is born among you may have come from a world on
which it had acquired altogether different habits. How
would you want this new being to remain in your midst
with passions so diverse from yours, inclinations and tastes
entirely opposite to yours? How would you want it to
incorporate itself into your environment except in the way
God wanted it to, that is, after having experienced the sieve
of childhood? In this phase are mixed all the thoughts, all
the characteristics and all the varieties of beings generated
by that multitude of worlds on which individuals develop.
Upon dying, you yourselves will also be in a sort of

childhood in the midst of new family members. In your
new non-terrestrial existence, you will be ignorant of the
habits, the customs and the forms of relationships of that
world, and you will have difficulty in managing a language
you are not used to speaking – a language more alive than
your thought is today. (See no. 319)

“Childhood provides yet another purpose: spirits only enter
corporeal life in order to improve and purify themselves.
The fragility of the early years renders them flexible and
accessible to the counsels of experience and to those who
should aid their progress. That is the time when one can
best reform their character and curb their evil tendencies.
Such is the duty that God entrusts to parents, a sacred
mission for which they will have to answer.

“Consequently, childhood is not only useful, necessary and
indispensable, but it is also the natural result of the laws
that God has established, and which govern the universe.”