Sleep and Dreams

Question 400:
Does an incarnate spirit willingly stay in its corporeal
envelope?

Answer:
“That is like asking if a prisoner is happy being under lock
and key. An incarnate spirit constantly aspires to freedom.
The denser the envelope, the more it wants to be free of it.”

Question 401:
During sleep does the soul rest like the body?

Answer:
“No, a spirit never remains inactive. During sleep, the bonds
that join it to the body are loosened, and since the body does
not need it while sleeping, the spirit travels through space
and enters into a more direct relationship with other spirits.”

Question 402:
How can we confirm the fact that a spirit is free during sleep?

Answer:
“By dreams. While the body rests, the spirit enjoys more
of its faculties than in the waking state. It remembers the
past and sometimes foresees the future. It acquires more
power and can communicate with other spirits whether on
this world or another. You frequently say, ‘I had a bizarre
dream, a horrible dream, but there is no likelihood of it
being true.’ You are mistaken. It is almost always a memory
of places and things which you have seen, or which you
will see in another existence or on another occasion. Since
the body is dormant, the spirit tries to break its chains in
order to probe into the past and future.

“Poor human beings! You know so little about the most
ordinary phenomena of life! You believe you are very wise,
yet the most ordinary things puzzle you to no end. To the
question of all children, ‘What do we do when we sleep?
What are dreams?’ you remain without an answer.

“Sleep partially frees the soul from the body. When
humans sleep, they momentarily find themselves in the
state which they will be in permanently after death. Spirits
who quickly free themselves from matter upon death had
intelligent dreams during earthly life. Such spirits, while
their body is sleeping, rejoin the company of those who
are more evolved; they travel with, converse with and learn
from them. They even work on projects that they find
completed upon dying. From these facts you should once
more learn not to fear death, because you die daily – as a
saint once stated.

“This applies only to more highly evolved spirits; however,
the mass of spirits, who at death must remain in a state of
confusion for some time – that uncertainty of which we
have already spoken to you – either go to worlds even less
evolved than earth, where former affections call to them or
where they seek out pleasures that are perhaps even baser
than those they indulge in here. They go to take in doctrines
even viler, more ignoble and more noxious than those
they profess among you. What engenders sympathies on
earth is nothing other than the fact that upon awakening,
they feel linked to the hearts of those with whom they
have just spent eight or nine hours of happiness or
pleasure. Moreover, the insuperable antipathies they feel
at the bottom of our heart for certain individuals may be
explained by the fact that they have a consciousness that is
different from their own; they recognize these individual
without having ever seen them before. It is furthermore
what explains people’s indifference when they do not seek
to make new friends – they know that those who love and
cherish them are elsewhere. In a word, sleep has more
influence than you think on your life.

“During sleep, incarnate spirits are always in touch with
the spirit world, and that is what leads high order spirits,
without too much aversion, to consent to incarnate
among you. During their contact with earthly vices, God
grants them the freedom to re-strengthen themselves
during sleep at the source of the good in order not to fail
in their commitment to instruct others. Sleep is the door
that God opens to them for contacting their friends in
heaven. It is their break after work while they await the
great deliverance, the final liberation that must restore
them to their true environment.

“A dream is the memory of what your spirit has seen during
sleep. However, notice that you do not always dream,
because you do not always remember what you have seen,

or everything that you have seen. This happens because
your soul is still under development, so that frequently
you retain nothing more than the confused memory
that accompanies your departure and your return, which
is mixed in with the memory of what you have done or
what concerns you have had while awake. Otherwise, how
do you explain those absurd dreams that both the wisest
and the simplest individuals endure? Evil spirits also use
dreams to torment weak and cowardly souls.

“Furthermore, you will soon see another type of dreaming
develop; a type as ancient as the kind you already know
about but of which you are ignorant. It is the dream of
Joan of Arc, the dream of Jacob, the dream of the Jewish
prophets and certain Indian seers: this sort of dream is
the remembrance of the soul entirely disengaged from the
body, the memory of that other life of which I have just
spoken to you.

“Try hard to distinguish between these two types of dreams
among those that you remember; unless you do, you will
fall into contradictions and errors that could be disastrous
for your faith.”

Dreams are a product of the emancipation of the soul, who becomes
more independent through the suspension of active life and
relationships. This results in a sort of fuzzy clairvoyance, which extends
to the most distant places or to those that have never been seen, and
sometimes even to other worlds. It also results in the remembrance
of events that have taken place in our present existence or in previous
ones. The singularity of the images referring to what is occurring or
has occurred on unknown worlds, mixed together with the images of
the present world, form those bizarre and confused medleys that seem
to have neither meaning nor connection.

The incoherence of dreams is further explained by the gaps resulting
from the incomplete memory of what has appeared to us during
the dream, much like a narrative from which sentences or parts of
sentences have been accidentally omitted; if the remaining fragments
were joined together, they would lose all rational meaning.

Question 403:
Why don’t we always remember our dreams?

Answer:
“During what you call sleep, you only experience the repose
of the body because the spirit is always in motion. During
sleep, it recovers a little of its freedom and communicates
with those who are dear to it either on this world or on
others. But since the body is composed of heavy and
dense matter, it is difficult for it to retain the impressions
received by the spirit because the spirit did not receive
them through the body’s organs in the first place.”

Question 404:
What should we think about the various meanings attributed
to dreams?

Answer:
“Dreams are not true in the sense that fortune-tellers, for
example, understand them, for it is absurd to believe that
dreaming about one matter necessarily foretells another.
They are true in the sense that they present real images to
the spirit, but these images often have no relation to what
occurs in its corporeal life. Furthermore, as we have stated,
many times they are a memory of the past. Lastly, they
may also sometimes be a presentiment of the future if God
allows it, or a vision of what is occurring at the moment
in another place to which the soul has gone. Don’t you
have numerous examples of persons who appear in dreams
to warn relatives and friends about what is happening to
them? What are these apparitions if not the soul or spirit
of these persons communicating with you? When you
confirm that what you have seen has really occurred, isn’t
it evidence that the imagination has had nothing to do
with it, especially if the event was absolutely not in your
thought while you were awake?”

Question 405:
Frequently, things are seen in dreams that appear to be
presentiments about matters that end up not occurring. Where
do these come from?

Answer:
“They may occur for the spirit if not for the body, which
means that the spirit sees what it desires because it goes
looking for it. You must not forget that during sleep the
soul is always more or less under the influence of matter,
and consequently it is never completely free from terrestrial
ideas. Therefore, the concerns of wakefulness may give
what you see the appearance of what you desire or what
you fear. This is really what can be called a trick of the
imagination. When you are strongly preoccupied with an
idea, you connect it to everything you see.”

Question 406:
When we see living persons perfectly known to us doing things
in a dream which they would absolutely never think of doing
in real life, isn’t it pure imagination?

Answer:
“Which they would absolutely never think about? How
do you know that? Their spirit may come to visit yours,
as yours may visit theirs, without your always knowing
what they are thinking about. Besides, according to your
desires, you frequently apply to individuals familiar to you
what occurred or is occurring in other existences.”

Question 407:
Is complete sleep necessary for the emancipation of the spirit?

Answer:
“No. The spirit recovers its freedom whenever the senses
become sluggish. It takes advantage of every moment of
respite that the body offers it to emancipate itself. As
soon as there is a prostration of the vital forces, the spirit
disengages itself; the weaker the body is, the freer the
spirit will be.”

Thus, a nap or a simple dulling of the senses often presents the same
images as dreaming does.

Question 408:
Sometimes it seems to us that we hear within us distinctly
pronounced words that have no relation to what we are
preoccupied with. Where do they come from?

Answer:
“Yes, and even entire sentences, especially when the senses
begin to grow dull. It is sometimes the faint echo of a
spirit who wishes to communicate with you.”

Question 409:
Often, while we have our eyes shut during a state that is not
yet sleep, we see distinct images and figures in the minutest
detail. Is this an effect of vision or of imagination?

Answer:
“The body being numb, the spirit tries to break its chains –
it travels and sees. If sleep were complete, this vision would
be a dream.”

Question 410:
During sleep or a nap, we sometimes have ideas that seem very
worthwhile, but which in spite of the efforts we make to recall
them are erased from our waking memory. Where do these
ideas come from?

Answer:
“They are the result of the freedom of the spirit, who
emancipates itself and enjoys broader faculties for the moment.
Also, they are frequently counsels given by other spirits.”

– Of what use are such ideas or counsels if the memory of
them is lost and they cannot be employed?

“Such ideas sometimes belong more to the spirit world
than to the corporeal one. But most frequently, if the body
forgets them the spirit remembers them nonetheless, and
the idea returns at the appropriate time as an inspiration
of the moment.”

Question 411:
During the time that the spirit is disengaged from matter and
acts as a spirit, does it know the time of its death?

Answer:
“It often has a presentiment. Sometimes it has a very clear
awareness of it, which gives it an intuition about it while
awake. That is why some individuals sometimes foresee
their own death with great precision.”

Question 412:
Can the activity of the spirit during the repose or sleep of the
body fatigue the body?

Answer:
“Yes, because the spirit is connected to the body like a
balloon tied to a post. In the same manner that the jerking
movements of the balloon shake the post, the activity of
the spirit reacts upon the body and may produce fatigue.”
