Relationships beyond the Grave

Question 274:
Do the different orders of spirits establish a hierarchy of powers,
and is there subordination and authority among them?

Answer:
“Very much so. Spirits have authority over one another
relative to their degree of evolution and exert it through
an irresistible moral ascendancy.”

– Can low order spirits evade the authority of those who are
more evolved?

“I said: irresistible.”

Question 275:
Do the power and influence that individuals enjoy on earth
warrant them any supremacy in the spirit world?

Answer:
“No, because the lowly will be exalted and the great will be
abased. Read the Psalms.”

– How should we understand this exalting and abasing?

“Don’t you already know that spirits are of different orders
according to their merits? Well then, the greatest on earth
may be in the last class among the spirits, while their
servants may be in the first. Don’t you understand this?
Didn’t Jesus say: ‘Whosoever humbles himself shall be
exalted, and whosoever exalts himself shall be humbled?’”

Question 276:
Don’t those who were great on earth but find themselves
abased among the spirits feel humiliation?

Answer:
“Of course, they almost always feel greatly humiliated,
especially if they had been proud and jealous.”

Question 277:
After a battle, does a soldier who meets his general in the spirit
world still acknowledge him as his superior?

Answer:
“The title is nothing. True superiority is everything.”

Question 278:
Are the spirits of different orders mixed together?

Answer:
“Yes and no; that is, they may see each other but they are
distinguished from each other. They avoid or approach one
another according to the similarity or dissimilarity of their
sentiments, as is also the case amongst you. It is an entire
world in and of itself and yours is only a dim reflection of it.
Those of the same order are drawn together by a sort of
affinity, and they form groups or families of spirits united
by sympathy and purpose: the good ones, by their desire
to do good; the evil ones, by their desire to do evil, by
shame for their wrongs and by the need to find themselves
among others like them.”

This is exactly like a large city, where individuals of all social classes
and conditions see and meet one another without mixing together,
where societies are formed by similarities in tastes, and where vice
and virtue jostle each other without speaking.

Question 279:
Do all spirits have mutual access to one another?

Answer:
“The good ones go everywhere; it must be this way in
order to bring their influence to bear upon the evil ones.
Nevertheless, the realms inhabited by the good ones are
forbidden to the imperfect ones so that the latter cannot
bring their evil passions there.”

Question 280:
What is the nature of the relationship between good and
evil spirits?

Answer:
“The good ones seek to combat the evil tendencies of the
others in order to help them evolve – it is a mission.”

Question 281:
Why do certain low order spirits take pleasure in inducing
us to evil?

Answer:
“They do so out of spite for not having deserved to
be among the good ones. Their desire is to prevent
inexperienced spirits, as much as possible, from attaining
the supreme good. They want to make others experience
what they themselves are experiencing. Don’t you see the
same amongst yourselves?”

Question 282:
How do spirits communicate with one another?

Answer:
“They see and comprehend one another. Speech is material:
it is a reflection of the spirit. The universal fluid establishes
a constant communication among them; it is the vehicle
for the transmission of thought, as the air is for you the
vehicle for sound. It is a sort of universal telegraph line
that connects all worlds, enabling spirits to communicate
from one world to another.”

Question 283:
Can spirits disguise their thoughts and hide themselves from
each other?

Answer:
“No, everything is out in the open for them, especially
when they are perfect. They may be apart from each other
but they always see each other. This is not an absolute
rule, however, since certain spirits can very easily make
themselves invisible to others if they deem it useful.”

Question 284:
Since spirits no longer have a body, how can they establish
their own individuality and make themselves recognizable to
others around them?

Answer:
“They establish their individuality by means of their
perispirit, which makes them distinct from one another,
as do bodies among humans.”

Question 285:
Do spirits recognize each other after having lived here on
earth? Does the son recognize his father and the friend, her
friend?

Answer:
“Yes, and thus from generation to generation.”

– How do those who knew each other on earth recognize each
other in the spirit world?

“We see our past life and read it there as if it were a book.
As we watch the friends and enemies of our past, we also
witness their passage from life to death.”

Question 286:
Upon leaving its mortal remains behind, does the soul
immediately see the relatives and friends who had preceded it
into the spirit world?

Answer:
“Not always immediately. As we have already said, it
requires some time to recognize its situation and shake off
the material veil.”

Question 287:
How is the soul received upon its return to the spirit world?

Answer:
“The soul of the just, as a beloved and long awaited bother
or sister; the soul of the wicked, as a despised being.”

Question 288:
What sentiment do impure spirits experience at the sight of
another evil spirit who has just arrived?

Answer:
“Evil spirits are pleased at seeing beings who resemble them
and who are deprived, like they are, of infinite happiness.
Just like on earth, it is a rascal among equals.”

Question 289:
Do our relatives and friends sometimes come to meet us when
we leave the earth?

Answer:
“Yes, they come to meet the soul they love. If it has escaped
the dangers of the road, they congratulate it as though it were
returning from a journey, and they help it to break free of its
corporeal bonds. It is a blessing granted to good spirits when
those who love them come to meet them; on the other hand,
those who are blemished remain in isolation or are surrounded
only by spirits like themselves – it is a punishment.”

Question 290:
Are relatives and friends always reunited after death?

Answer:
“That depends on how evolved they are and the path
they are following for their advancement. If one of them
is more advanced and progresses more quickly than the
other, they cannot remain together. They may see each
other occasionally, but they will not be reunited until they
can walk side by side, or when they have reached equality
of purification. Moreover, being kept from seeing relatives
and friends is sometimes a punishment.”