Intelligence and Instinct

Question 71:
Is intelligence an attribute of the vital principle?

Answer:
“No. Plants are alive but they do not think – they only
have organic life. Intelligence and matter are independent
of each other; a body may be alive yet lack intelligence,
but intelligence can only be expressed through material
organs. Only the union with spirit endows animalized
matter with intelligence.”26

Intelligence is a special faculty possessed by certain classes of organic
beings, which it endows with thought, the willpower to act and the
awareness of their own existence and individuality. Additionally, it

26 See questions nos. 540, 585, 593 and 606. Everything in nature is subject to the law of
progress – Tr.

endows them with the means to establish relations with the external
world and to provide for their own needs.

We may therefore distinguish the following: first, inanimate
beings, formed of matter alone, without vitality or intelligence –
these are the solid bodies of minerals; second, animate, nonthinking beings, formed of matter and endowed with vitality but
not intelligence; third, animate beings, formed of matter, endowed
with vitality and possessed of an intelligent principle that gives
them the ability to think.

Question 72:
What is the source of intelligence?

Answer:
“We have already said: the universal intelligence.”

– Could we say that every intelligent being draws and assimilates
a portion of intelligence from the universal source in the same
way that it draws and assimilates the principle of material life?

“That is only an imprecise comparison because intelligence
is a faculty proper to each being and comprises its mental
individuality. Besides, you already know that there are
matters that humans are not allowed to comprehend; this
is one of them – for now.”

Question 73:
Is instinct something other than intelligence?

Answer:
“Not exactly; it is a type of intelligence. Instinct is nonreasoning intelligence, through which all beings provide
for their own needs.”

Question 74:
Can we draw a line between instinct and intelligence; i.e. can
we determine when one ends and the other begins?

Answer:
“No, for they frequently commingle. However, we can
very well distinguish the actions belonging to instinct
from those belonging to intelligence.”

Question 75:
Is it correct to say that the instinctive faculties decrease as the
intellectual faculties increase?

“No, instinct is always present, but humans neglect it.
Instinct can lead us to the good; it almost always guides
us – sometimes more surely than our reason. It never errs.”

– Why isn’t reason always an infallible guide?

“It would be if it were not distorted by pride, selfishness
and faulty education. Instinct does not reason, whereas
reason calls for choice and endows humans with free will.”

Instinct is a rudimentary intelligence. It differs from intelligence per
se in that its manifestations are almost always spontaneous, while
those of intelligence are the result of thought and deliberate action.

Instinct manifests in various ways according to the different
species and their needs. In beings with consciousness and the
perception of external things, it allies itself with intelligence, i.e.,
with will and freedom.