The Joining of the Soul with the Body. Abortion

Question 344:
At what moment does the soul actually join the body?

Answer:
“The union begins at conception but is only complete at
the moment of birth. From the moment of conception,
the spirit designated to inhabit a given body is connected
to it by a fluidic tie, which gets tighter and tighter up
to the instant the child is born. The newborn’s cries
announce that it has entered the number of the living and
the servants of God.”

Question 345:
Is the union between the spirit and body definitive from
the moment of conception? In other words, during this first
stage could the spirit refuse to inhabit the body that has been
designated for it?

Answer:
“The union is definitive in the sense that no other spirit can
replace the one who has been designated for that particular
body. However, since the ties that bind it are very tenuous
and easy to break, they may actually be severed by the will
of a spirit who recoils from the trial it has chosen. In that
case, the child does not survive.”

Question 346:
What happens to a spirit if the body it has chosen dies before
birth?

Answer:
“It chooses another.”

– What could be the usefulness of such premature deaths?

“The imperfections of matter are frequently the cause of
such deaths.”

Question 347:
What usefulness can a spirit derive from incarnating into a
body that dies a few days after birth?

Answer:
“Such a being does not yet have a sufficiently developed
consciousness of its existence; the importance of its death
is almost null. As we have already said, these cases are often
meant as a trial for the parents.”

Question 348:
Does a spirit know beforehand that the body it has chosen will
have no chance of surviving?

Answer:
“It knows sometimes, but if it chooses it for that reason, it
does so in order to avoid its upcoming trial.”

Question 349:
When a particular incarnation fails for a spirit for any reason,
is it immediately furnished with another existence?

Answer:
“Not always immediately. The spirit requires time to make
another choice, unless an immediate reincarnation had
been previously decided upon.”

Question 350:
Once definitely united to the body of a child and therefore
no longer able to withdraw, does a spirit sometimes regret the
choice it has made?

Answer:
“Do you mean if as an incarnate spirit it might complain
about its life, or if it would like to have another? Yes. Does
it regret the choice it made? No, because it does not even
remember having made the choice in the first place. Once
incarnate, a spirit cannot regret a choice of which it has no
awareness, but it may find the burden to be too heavy, and
if it thinks the burden is beyond its strength to endure, it
may resort to suicide.”

Question 351:
In the interval between conception and birth, do spirits enjoy
all their faculties?

Answer:
“More so or less so, depending on the phase of gestation
because during that time they are not yet fully incarnated;
they are only attached to the body. At the moment of
conception, confusion begins to envelop the spirit and
it is thereby warned that the time has come to start a
new existence. This confusion increases until the time of
birth. In the meantime, its state is more or less that of
an incarnate spirit during sleep. As the moment of birth
approaches, its ideas are erased, as well as its memory of
the past, which it is no longer conscious of once it returns
to life on the earth. But this memory returns little by little
when it reenters the spirit state.”

Question 352:
At the moment of birth, do spirits immediately recover the
fullness of their faculties?

Answer:
“No, the faculties develop gradually with the organs.
Spirits find themselves in a new existence and must learn
to use their bodily instruments. Their ideas return little by
little, like those of individuals who wake up from sleep to
find themselves in a different situation than the one they
were in the day before.”

Question 353:
Since the union of a spirit with its body is not complete and
definitely consummated until after birth, can the fetus be
considered as having a soul?

Answer:
“The spirit who must animate it exists outside of it, so
to speak. Strictly speaking, the fetus has no soul since
the current incarnation is only in the process of being
accomplished. Nevertheless, the fetus is linked to the soul
that it will have.”

Question 354:
How can intra-uterine life be explained?

Answer:
“It is like a germinating plant. The fetus lives a corporeal
animal-like life. As a fetus, human beings already have
within themselves a vegeto-animal47 life, which they
complete at birth with a spiritual life.”

Question 355:
As medical science has pointed out, there are infants who,
even in their mother’s womb, have no possibility of surviving.
For what purpose does this occur?

Answer:
“This is a common occurrence that God permits as a trial,
either for the parents or the spirit appointed to animate
the child.”

Question 356:
Are there stillborn infants who were not meant for a spirit to
incarnate in them in the first place?

Answer:
“Yes, there are some who never had a spirit destined for
their bodies  – nothing would have been accomplished
in them. It is solely for the parents that such a child is
delivered.”

– Can a being of such a nature be carried to term?

“Yes, sometimes, but then it does not survive.”

– Then every child that survives necessarily has a spirit
incarnated in it?

“Of course; what would it be without a spirit? It would
not be a human being.”

Question 357:
What are the consequences of abortion for a spirit?

Answer:
“Its existence is nullified and must be commenced again.”

Question 358:
Is artificial abortion a crime regardless of the time of conception?

Answer:
“A crime is always committed when the law of God is
transgressed. The mother or any other person involved always
commits a crime upon taking the life of a child before its
birth because it prevents a soul from experiencing the trials for
which the unborn’s body was to have been the instrument.”

Question 359:
In cases where the life of the mother would be endangered
by the birth of the child, is it a crime to sacrifice the child in
order to save the mother?

Answer:
“It is better to sacrifice the being who does not yet exist
than the being who already exists.”

Question 360:
Is it rational to treat the fetus with the same respect as the
body of a child who has already survived?

Answer:
“You should see the will of God and the divine handiwork
in everything, and not treat lightly the things you ought to
respect. Why not respect all the works of creation, which
are sometimes incomplete by the will of the Creator?
Everything follows according to God’s designs and no one
is called upon to judge them.”