Fatalism

Question 851:
Is there fatalism in the events of life according to the
usual meaning attached to the word; that is, are all events
predetermined, and if so, what becomes of free will?

Answer:
“Fatalism only exists when applied to the choice made by
spirits upon incarnating to undergo this or that trial. Upon
choosing a particular trial, they delineate for themselves a
kind of destiny, which is the proper consequence of the
position in which they now find themselves. I am referring
only to trials of a physical nature. As for moral trials and
temptations, spirits preserve their free will to choose good
or evil and they are always able to yield or resist. When
good spirits see individuals lose courage, they may rush
to their aid but they cannot influence them to the point
of eclipsing their will. An evil spirit, that is, a low order
one, can disturb and frighten them by exacerbating a
physical danger. Whatever the circumstances, however, the
incarnate spirit still retains its entire freedom of choice.”

Question 852:
There are persons who seem to be pursued by fatalism no
matter what they do. Is it their destiny to be unfortunate?

Answer:
“There may be trials which they must endure and which
they themselves have chosen. Once more you blame destiny,
which is almost always a consequence of your own deeds.
In the midst of the hardships afflicting you, make sure your
conscience is clear. You will then feel partially consoled.”

The right or wrong ideas that we form about things cause us to
succeed or fail according to our character and our social position.
We find it easier and less humiliating to our vanity to attribute
our failures to fate or destiny rather than to our own fault. If the
influence of spirits sometimes contributes to this, we can always
free ourselves from it by repelling the ideas they suggest when such
ideas are evil.

Question 853:
There are persons who escape one mortal danger only to fall
into another. They seem unable to escape death. Isn’t there
fatalism in this?

Answer:
“Fatalism, in the true meaning of the word, applies only
to the instant of death. When that moment arrives in one
form or another, you cannot escape it.”

– Then whatever may be the danger that threatens us, we will
not die if our hour has not come?

“No, you will not die, and you have thousands of examples.
But when your hour for departure comes, nothing will save
you. God knows beforehand what kind of death will cause
your departure, and frequently your spirit also knows it
because it was revealed to it when it made the choice of
this or that existence.”

Question 854:
From the infallibility of the hour of death, does it follow that
the precautions taken to avoid it are useless?

Answer:
“No, because the precautions you take are suggested to
you in order to avoid the death that could result from the
dangers that threaten you. They are one of the means used
so that it does not occur.”

Question 855:
What is the intent of Providence in making us incur dangers
that will have no result?

Answer:
“When your life is in danger, it is a warning that you
yourself have desired in order to turn you from evil and
to enable you to become better. Once you escape this
danger, and while still under the influence of the risk you
incurred, you consider with greater or lesser intensity –
depending on the strength of the action of good spirits –
to become a better person. However, once the evil spirits
(I say evil in reference to the evil that is still in them)
return, you think that you can dodge other dangers just
as easily and you allow your passions to be unleashed
once more. Through the dangers you incur, God reminds
you of your weakness and the fragility of your existence.
If we examine the cause and nature of any danger, we
will see that in the majority of cases the consequences
are punishment for some wrong committed or a duty
neglected. God thus warns you to reflect on and correct
your wrongs.” (See nos. 526-532)

Question 856:
Does the spirit know beforehand what kind of death it will suffer?

Answer:
“It knows that the kind of life it has chosen will expose it
to dying more probably in one way than in another. But it
also knows which struggles it will have to sustain in order
to avoid it; and if God so wills, it will not succumb.”

Question 857:
There are soldiers who brave the perils of combat with a
certain conviction that their hour has not yet come. Is there
any foundation for such confidence?

Answer:
“Quite frequently, individuals have a presentiment of their
end and thus they may have a presentiment that they will
not yet die. This presentiment is given to them by their
protector spirits, who desire to warn them in order for
them to be ready to depart, or in order to rebuild their
courage at times when it becomes necessary. It may also
come to them from their own intuition of the life they
have chosen or of the mission they have accepted, and
which they know they must fulfill.” (See nos. 411-522)

Question 858:
Why do those who foresee their death generally dread it less
than others?

Answer:
“It is the individual who dreads death, not the spirit.
Those who foresee it think more as a spirit rather than as
a physical entity. They understand their deliverance and
they wait for it.”

Question 859:
If death cannot be avoided when our hour arrives, is it the
same in regard to all the accidents that occur over the course
of our life?

Answer:
“They are generally small enough matters about which we
can warn you by directing your thought in such a way that

you may avoid them, for we do not like physical suffering.
However, this is of little importance for the course of the life
you have chosen. Actually, bona fide fatalism applies only at
the times when you must enter and depart this world.”

– Are there events which must necessarily occur, and which
the will of the spirits cannot avert?

“Yes, but which you, when in the spirit state, foresaw and
anticipated upon making your choice. However, do not
believe that everything that happens to you is ‘written’, as
some say. An event is almost always the consequence of
something you have done by an act of your own free will
in such a way that if you had not done so, the event would
not have occurred. If you burn your finger, it is only the
consequence of your imprudence and the condition of
matter. Only the great sorrows – those important events
that are capable of influencing your moral evolution  –
are foreseen by God because they are useful for your
purification and education.”

Question 860:
Can humans through their own will and efforts avoid events
that were to occur, and vice-versa?

Answer:
“They can, if this apparent deviation fits into the general
order of the life that they have chosen. Furthermore, in
doing good – their duty and the sole purpose of life – they
can prevent evil, especially that which might contribute to
a still greater evil.”

Question 861:
Upon choosing their existence, do those who commit a murder
know at the time that they would become murderers?

Answer:
“No. They only know that in choosing a life of struggle
they will incur the probability of killing one of their fellow
beings, but they do not know if they will actually do so or
not. Murderers will almost always deliberate in their minds
before committing the crime, and those who deliberate
about something are always free to do it or not. If spirits
knew beforehand that as individuals they would have to
commit a murder, it would mean they were predestined
to do so. However, you should be very clear about the fact
that no one is ever predestined to commit a crime, and
that every crime, like any and every other act, is always
the result of volition and free will. Moreover, you always
confuse two very distinct things: the material events of
existence and the moral acts of life. If there is sometimes
fatalism, it only applies to material events where the cause
is outside of you and independent of your will. As for
the acts of the moral life, they always emanate from the
individual him or herself, who therefore always has the
freedom of choice. There is never fatalism in such acts.”

Question 862:
There are those who never manage to succeed, who seem to be
pursued by a bad influence in all their undertakings. Isn’t this
what we could call fatalism?

Answer:
“It could be fatalism if you would like to call it that,
but it results from the choice of the kind of existence.
Such individuals wanted to experience a life full of
disappointment in order to exercise their patience and
resignation. However, you must not believe that this
fatalism is always unavoidable. It is often only the result
of their having taken a wrong path that is not in keeping
with their intelligence and aptitudes. Someone who tries
to swim across a river without knowing how to swim
stands a very good chance of drowning. It is the same in
most events of life. If people did not try to undertake more
than what was in keeping with their own faculties they
would always succeed. What causes their failure are their
self-centeredness and ambition, which divert them from
their proper path and make them consider a vocation that
entails nothing but the desire to satisfy certain passions.
They then fail and it is their own fault; but instead of
recognizing their error, they prefer to blame their
horoscope. For instance, a man would have been a good
workman making an honorable living, but he became a
bad poet instead and died of hunger. There would be a
place for everybody if each one knew how to occupy his
or her own niche.”

Question 863:
Don’t social customs often obligate people to follow a certain
path rather than another? And aren’t they subject to the
influence of others’ opinions in their choice of occupation? Isn’t
what we call human respect actually an obstacle to the exercise
of our free will?

Answer:
“Social customs are made by humans, not by God; if they
submit to them, it is because they suit them. This is also
an act of free will, because if they wanted to, they could
reject them. So why do they complain? They should not
accuse social customs, but their own foolish vanity, which
leads them to prefer to die of hunger rather than infringe
upon such customs. Nobody takes this sacrifice to public
opinion into account, though God will take into account
their sacrifice to their own vanity. This does not mean they
should unnecessarily go against public opinion, like certain
persons who are more possessed of eccentricity than true
philosophy. It is just as absurd to display oneself as an oddity
as it is wise to willingly descend the social ladder without
complaining if one cannot remain at the top.”

Question 864:
If there are persons whom fate seems to be against, others seem
to be favored by it because everything goes well for them. To
what may this be attributed?

Answer:
“Usually, they are better at self-guidance. However, it
could also be a kind of trial: success intoxicates them; they
trust in their destiny and later they frequently pay for their
success with cruel reversals that could have been avoided
with a little prudence.”

Question 865:
How can we explain the luck that seems to favor certain
individuals in circumstances that depend neither on will nor
intelligence – games of chance, for example?

Answer:
“Certain spirits have chosen certain types of pleasure
beforehand, and the luck that favors them is a temptation.
Those who win in the material sense might lose as spirits –
it is a trial for their pride and greed.”

Question 866:
Then wouldn’t the fatalism that seems to preside over our
destinies in the material life also be the result of our free will?

Answer:
“You yourselves have chosen your trials. The more difficult
they are and the better you bear them, the more you evolve.
Those who spend their lives in the selfish enjoyment of
abundance and their own welfare are cowardly spirits who
remain at a standstill. Thus, the number of the unfortunate
greatly surpasses the fortunate, since the majority of spirits
have sought the trials that will be most useful to them.
They see too clearly the futility of earthly grandeurs and
pleasures. Besides, the most satisfactory life is always full of
events and its own problems to solve, even in the absence
of suffering.” (See nos. 525 ff.)

Question 867:
Where does the expression “born under a lucky star” come from?

Answer:
“It comes from an old superstition, according to which
the stars were connected with the destiny of each human
being – an allegory that some people are foolish enough
to take literally.”