The Progression of Spirits

Question 114:
Are spirits good or evil by nature, or may they seek to improve
themselves?

Answer:
“They may improve themselves, and as they do so they
pass from a lower order to a higher one.”

Question 115:
Have some spirits been created good and others evil?

Answer:
“God has created all spirits simple and ignorant, i.e.,
without knowledge. God has given each of them a mission.
It is aimed at enlightening them and progressively leading
them toward perfection through knowledge of the truth
in order to draw them near to God. In that perfection,
they will find eternal bliss without any troubles. Spirits
acquire knowledge by experiencing the trials that God
has imposed on them. Some humbly accept these trials
and thus arrive more quickly at their destiny, whereas
others cannot endure them without complaining; thus,
through their own fault these latter ones remain far from
the perfection and bliss promised to them.”

– Then are all spirits at their origin ignorant and inexperienced
like children, who gradually acquire the knowledge they lack
by passing through the different phases of human life?

“Yes, that is an accurate comparison. How much children
improve depends on their behavior – rebellious children
remain ignorant and imperfect. However, human life has
an ending, whereas that of spirits extends to infinity.”

Question 116:
Are there spirits who remain forever in the lower orders?

Answer:
“No, all will become perfect. They change, albeit slowly, for
as we once said, a just and merciful father cannot banish his
children forever. Do you think that God, who is so great, so
good and so just, could be worse than you yourselves?”

Question 117:
Does it depend on spirits themselves to hasten their
advancement toward perfection?

Answer:
“Absolutely. The amount of time it takes them depends on
their desire and submission to God’s will. Doesn’t a wellbehaved child learn faster than one who is obstinate?”

Question 118:
Can spirits regress?

Answer:
“No. As they progress, they gain an understanding of what
is holding them back from perfection. When a spirit finishes
a particular trial, it never forgets the knowledge it acquired.
A spirit may remain stationary, but it never regresses.”

Question 119:
Could God exempt spirits from the trials that are required of
them to reach the first order?

Answer:
“If they had been created already perfect, they would
not deserve to enjoy the benefits of that perfection.
Where would the merit be without the struggle? Besides,
inequality among them is necessary for their personalities
to develop, while the missions entrusted to them in the
various degrees of the hierarchy reside in the designs of
Providence for ensuring the harmony of the universe.”

Since it is possible for everyone in societal life to reach the highest
positions, we might just as easily ask why sovereigns of countries
do not make generals of every one of their soldiers, why all entry
level employees are not made supervisors or why all students are
not professors. There is, however, one distinct difference between
societal life and spirit life in that the former is limited and does
not always allow everyone to reach the highest degree, whereas the
latter is unlimited and assures everyone the possibility of reaching
the highest position.

Question 120:
Must all spirits pass through the trial of evil to reach the good?

Answer:
“Not evil, but ignorance.”

Question 121:
Why have some spirits followed the path of the good, but
others the path of evil?

Answer:
“Don’t they have free will? God does not create any spirits
evil from the start; they are created simple and ignorant,
that is, capable of both good and evil. Those who are evil
have become so through their own will.”

Question 122:
At their origin, how are spirits free to choose between good
and evil when they are not yet self-aware? Is there some inner
principle or tendency that leads them more toward one side
than the other?

Answer:
“Free will develops as the spirit acquires self-awareness. There
would be no actual choice if it were made by a cause extraneous
to the spirit’s will. The cause is not within the spirit, but outside,
in the influences to which it yields in virtue of its free will. This
is the great symbol of the fall of humankind and original sin:
some yielded to temptation; others resisted it.”

– Where do the influences that act upon spirits come from?

“From the imperfect spirits who seek to involve and
dominate them, and who delight in making them succumb.
This is what is represented in the allegory of Satan.”

– Does this influence act on a spirit only when it first comes
into being?

“It follows the spirit over the course of its existence until
it has acquired so much self-control that evil spirits do not
bother it any longer.”

Question 123:
Why does God allow spirits to follow the path of evil?

Answer:
“How do you dare ask God to give account for the divine
acts? Do you think you can delve into God’s will? Instead,
you should say that God’s wisdom is found in the freedom
of choice that has been granted to each spirit so that each
one may have the merit of its own deeds.”

Question 124:
There are spirits who follow the path of the absolute good
from the beginning, while others follow the path of absolute
evil. Aren’t there gradations between these two extremes?

Answer:
“Yes, certainly; they are the paths of the vast majority.”

Question 125:
Will those spirits who follow the path of evil be able to arrive
at the same degree of elevation as the others?

Answer:
“Yes, but the eternities will be much longer for them.”

We must understand the expression “eternities” to mean the way
in which imperfect spirits regard the perpetuity of their sufferings,
whose end they are not allowed to foresee. This belief is renewed
every time they succumb to a trial.

Question 126:
In God’s sight, are the spirits who reach the highest degree after
having passed through evil less meritorious than the others?

Answer:
“God looks upon those who have gone astray with the
same regard and loves all of them in the same way. They
are called evil because they have succumbed; before that,
they were nothing more than simple spirits.”

Question 127:
Are all spirits created equal with regards to their intellectual
faculties?

Answer:
“They are all created equal, but since they do not know
where they come from, they must develop their free
will. They progress in both intelligence and morality at
different rates.”

Spirits who follow the path of the good from the beginning are
not therefore perfect because of it. Although they have no evil
tendencies, they must still acquire the necessary experience and
knowledge needed for perfection. We could compare them to
children who must develop and learn no matter how good their
natural instincts are  – they do not suddenly go from infancy
to adulthood without a transition. Just as there are individuals
who are good from childhood and others who are evil, there are
spirits who are good or evil from the start, but with the crucial
difference that a child possesses its instincts already formed,
whereas a spirit is neither evil nor good at its formation. Rather,
it has both tendencies, taking one direction or the other in virtue
of its own free will.