Civilization

Question 790:
Does civilization represent progress for humankind or does it
represent decadence, as some philosophers profess?

Answer:
“Incomplete progress because humankind does not pass
suddenly from infancy to maturity.”

– Is it reasonable to condemn civilization?

“Instead, condemn those who abuse it; don’t condemn the
work of God.”

Question 791:
Will civilization be purified one day so that the evils it has
produced will disappear?

Answer:
“Yes, when morality is as developed as intelligence. The
fruit cannot come before the blossom.”

Question 792:
Why doesn’t civilization immediately effectuate all the good it
could produce?

Answer:
“Because humans are not yet ready or disposed to obtain
that good.”

– Wouldn’t it also be because in creating new needs it incites
new passions?

“Yes, and because all of a spirit’s faculties do not evolve in
tandem – everything takes time. You cannot expect perfect
fruit from an imperfect civilization.” (See nos. 751-780)

Question 793:
By what signs may one recognize a completed civilization?

Answer:
“You will recognize it by its moral development. You believe
yourselves to be very advanced because you have made great
discoveries and wonderful inventions, and because you are
better situated and better clothed than primitives. However,
you will only have the right to truly call yourselves civilized
when you have finally banished the vices from your society
that dishonor it, and when you finally live as brothers and
sisters by practicing Christian charity. Until then, you are
really no more than enlightened cultures that have passed
through only the first phase of civilization.”

Civilization goes through stages of development like everything
else. An incomplete civilization is in a state of transition which
engenders special evils unknown in the primitive state, but which
nonetheless constitute a natural and necessary progress that brings
with it the remedy for those very evils. As civilization perfects itself,
it puts an end to some of the evils it has engendered, and all evils
will eventually disappear with moral progress.

Of two cultures that have reached the summit of the social scale, the
one that may be called the more advanced, in the true sense of the word,
is the one where the least selfishness, cupidity, and pride are found;
where the customs are more intellectual and moral than material;
where intelligence can develop with more freedom; where there is more
kindness, good faith, and reciprocal benevolence and generosity; where
the prejudices of caste and birth are less rooted, for such prejudices
are incompatible with true love for one’s neighbor; where the laws do
not grant any special privileges and are the same for the last as for the
first; where justice is administered with the least partiality; where the
weak always find support against the strong; where human life, beliefs
and opinions are better respected; where there are fewer unhappy
individuals; and lastly, where persons of goodwill are always sure they
will not lack the minimum of what is needed to live on.