The Attributes of the Divinity

Question 10:
Can human beings fathom God’s innermost nature?

Answer:
“No, they lack the aptitude to comprehend it.”

Question 11:
Will they ever be able to fathom the mystery of the Divinity?

Answer:
“When their spirits are no longer eclipsed by matter, and
when they have finally purified themselves enough to be able
to approach God, then they will see and comprehend God.”

The inferior nature of their faculties makes it impossible for human
beings to fathom God’s innermost nature. While humanity is in its
infancy, people often confuse God with God’s creatures, imputing
to God their own imperfections. However, they ponder the nature
of things more deeply as their moral sense develops and thus they
acquire a truer  – though always incomplete  – idea of God that
conforms more to reason.

Question 12:
Even though we cannot fathom God’s innermost nature, can
we get an idea of some of the divine perfections?

Answer:
“Yes, some of them. Human beings comprehend them
better only as they progressively overcome matter, but they
can at least get glimpses of them through thought.”

Question 13:
When we state that God is eternal, infinite, immutable,
immaterial, one, all-powerful, and supremely just and good,
don’t we have a complete idea of God’s attributes?

Answer:
“From your own point of view, yes, because you believe
that in so stating them you therefore have named all of
them. Nevertheless, you should understand that there are
things that transcend the intelligence of the most intelligent
person, things your language cannot define, because it is
limited to your ideas and sensations. Your reason tells you
that God must be perfect in those attributes to the nth
degree, for if God lacked any of them or was not perfect

God

in them to the nth degree, God would not be superior to
everything else, and thus would not be God. In order to be
superior to everything else, God must not be subject to any
change and must not be imperfect in any way imaginable.”

God is eternal. If God had had a beginning, then either God would
have had to have sprung from nothing or would have had to have
been created by a being that existed previously. Reasoning in this
way, we arrive little by little at the idea of eternity and the infinite.

God is immutable. If God were subject to change, then the laws that
govern the universe would have no stability.

God is immaterial. This means that God’s nature differs from
everything we call matter; otherwise, God would not be immutable
but would be subject to the transformations of matter.

God is one. If there were several gods, then there would be no unity
of design or power in the organization of the universe.

God is all-powerful because God is one. If God were not powerful
above all else, it would mean that there was something more
powerful or at least as powerful. It would mean that God might not
have created all things, and those that God did not create would
have had to have been the work of some other god.

God is supremely just and good. The providential wisdom in the
divine laws is revealed in the smallest things as well as in the largest,
and this wisdom makes it impossible for us to doubt either God’s
justice or goodness.