Pacts

Question 549:
Is there any kind of truth to pacts being formed with evil
spirits?

“No, there are no such pacts. However, an evil nature
may be attuned to evil spirits. For example: you want
to torment your neighbor, but you do not know how to
proceed. Thus, you call low order spirits who, like you,
desire only evil. In return for their help, they want you to
help them in their own evil designs. However, this does
not mean that your neighbor cannot be freed from them
by an opposing appeal or by an action of the will. Those
who desire to commit an act of evil, simply for the sake
of committing evil, call evil spirits to their aid, and then
become obliged to serve them in turn because these spirits
need them for the evil they themselves desire to do. It is
only in this that a pact consists.”

The fact that persons sometimes find themselves dependent on low
order spirits proceeds from their delivering themselves over to the
evil thoughts that such spirits suggest to them, and not from any
kind of stipulations made between them. A pact, in the usual sense
of the word, is an allegory that portrays an evil nature sympathizing
with equally wicked spirits.

Question 550:
What is the meaning of the fantastic fables according to which
certain individuals have sold their soul to Satan in exchange
for certain favors?

Answer:
“All fables contain a teaching and a moral; your error is in
taking them literally. This one is an allegory that may be
explained like this: those who call evil spirits to help them
obtain the gifts of fortune or any other favor rebel against
Providence. They renounce the mission they have received
and the trials they must undergo in this world, but they
will reap the consequences of it in the life to come. This
does not mean their soul is condemned to suffer forever.
However, instead of detaching themselves from matter,
they immerse themselves deeper and deeper in it. The joys
they have preferred on earth will no longer be available to
them in the spirit world until they atone for their wrong
through new trials that will perhaps be even greater and
more painful. Out of love for material pleasures, they place
themselves under the power of impure spirits. Hence, they
tacitly establish a mutual pact which leads them to ruin,
but which will always be easy for them to break with the
assistance of good spirits if they firmly desire to do so.”