The Spirit Hierarchy

Question 100:
PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS. – The classification of
spirits is based on their degree of development, the qualities
they have acquired, and the imperfections from which they
have not yet freed themselves. This classification is by no
means absolute; no single category displays a well-defined
characteristic except as a group. The transition is hardly
noticeable from one degree to the next. The gradations
blend together at their borders, much like what occurs in
the kingdoms of nature, in the colors of the rainbow or even
in the different phases of human life. Thus, we may form
a larger or smaller number of classes, depending on how
we consider the subject. Such is the case with all systems
of scientific classification. Such systems may entail various
degrees of completeness, reasonableness or convenience for
the intellect. Whichever way they are viewed, however, in
reality they change nothing regarding science itself. In this
regard, the Spirits30 questioned about this could have given
various answers as to the number of categories without
harming the overall idea. There are persons who have
rather latched on to this seeming contradiction without
considering the fact that spirits do not give any importance
to what is purely conventional. For them, the thought is
everything. To us they leave the form, the choice of terms,
the classifications – in a word, the systems.

Furthermore, we would add yet one more consideration that
we must always bear in mind: among spirits, as among human
beings, there are some who are very ignorant, and we must
always be on our guard against the tendency to believe that
they know everything simply because they are spirits. Every
attempt at classification demands a methodical analysis and an
in-depth knowledge of the subject. In addition, just as there are
ignorant individuals in this world, there are those in the spirit
world with limited knowledge, who are incapable of learning
and formulating any kind of system. They only know or
comprehend any classification imperfectly. To them, all spirits
who are more highly evolved than themselves are of the first order
because they cannot discern their differences of knowledge,
ability and morality – as would be the case with an uneducated
person among us in relation to learned individuals. Even those
who may be capable of formulating a system can vary in the
details according to their own points of view, especially when
a division has nothing absolute about it. Linnaeus, Jussieu and
Tournefort each had their own method, but botany did not
change because of it. They invented neither plants nor their
characteristics but merely observed analogies, forming groups

and classes accordingly. We have done the same: we invented
neither spirits nor their characteristics; rather, we watched and
observed. We judged by their words and acts, and afterward
we classified them according to their similarities, basing our
classification on the data they themselves had furnished us.

The Spirits generally acknowledge three main categories
or large divisions. In the last category and at the bottom
of the scale are the imperfect spirits, characterized by the
predominance of matter over spirit and an inclination
toward evil. Those of the second are characterized by the
predominance of the spirit nature over matter and their
desire to practice the good: they are the good spirits. And
finally, the first category includes the pure spirits, who
have reached the highest degree of purification.

This division seems perfectly rational and displays welldefined characteristics, leaving us only to discern, through a
sufficient number of subcategories, the main nuances of each
group as a whole. That is what we did with the help of the
Spirits, whose benevolent instructions have never failed us.

With the aid of the following classifications it will be easy
to determine the order and degree of the highly evolved
or less evolved spirits with whom we may associate, and
consequently, the degree of trust and esteem they deserve.
In some ways, this is the key to Spiritist science because it
alone can explain to us the anomalies that sometimes appear
in communications by enlightening us regarding spirits’
intellectual and moral inequalities. However, we should note
that spirits do not perpetually and exclusively belong to this or
that class. Their progress is gradual, and since it often occurs
in one area more than in another at any given time, they can
display characteristics of several categories, a fact which is easy
to discern through their language and acts.

Third Order – Imperfect Spirits

Question 101:
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS: Predominance of
matter over spirit; a propensity toward evil; ignorance, pride,
selfishness, and all the evil passions that result from them.

They have an intuition of God, but they do not
comprehend God.

Not all are essentially evil, however. Some are more frivolous,
thoughtless and malicious than downright wicked. Some
do neither good nor evil, but the simple fact that they
do no good reveals them to be imperfect. However, there
are others who take pleasure in wickedness per se and are
gratified when they find an opportunity to practice it.

Third-order spirits can ally intelligence with wickedness
or malice, but regardless of their intellectual development,
their ideas lack elevation and their sentiments are more or
less contemptible.

Their knowledge about the things of the spirit world is limited,
and the little they do know is confused with the ideas and
prejudices of corporeal life. They cannot give us more than
faulty and incomplete ideas of that world, but the attentive
observer may frequently find in their faulty communications
great truths taught by the highly purified spirits.

Their character is revealed by their language. Every spirit
who betrays an evil thought in its communications can be
placed into the third order; consequently, every evil thought
that may be suggested to us comes from a spirit of this order.

They see the happiness of the good spirits, a sight that
tortures them endlessly because they experience all the
anguish that envy and jealousy can produce.

They also retain the memory and perception of the sufferings
of their corporeal life, and this impression is often more
painful than was the reality itself. Therefore, they indeed
suffer from the wrongs they themselves endured and from
those they caused others. And since they suffer from them
for a very long time, they believe they will continue to suffer
forever: a belief allowed by God as a punishment.

We may divide these spirits into five principal classes:

Question 102:
Tenth class. IMPURE SPIRITS. These are inclined toward
evil and make it the object of all their preoccupations. As
spirits, they give unscrupulous advice, incite discord and
distrust, and use all sorts of disguises in order to deceive
more effectively. They associate with individuals whose
character is sufficiently weak to make them yield to their
suggestions and be led into misfortune, and they are
pleased at being able to retard these individuals’ progress by
causing them to succumb in the trials they must undergo.

In their manifestations, these spirits may be recognized
by their language: trivialness and coarseness of expression
among spirits, as among humans, is always indicative of
moral, if not intellectual, inferiority. Their communications
reveal the baseness of their inclinations, and if they try to
fool us by speaking sensibly, they are unable to maintain the
ruse for very long and always end up betraying their origin.

Certain cultures have transformed them into malevolent
deities, while others have designated them as demons or
evil spirits.

During incarnation, they are inclined toward all the
vices that are engendered by vile and degrading passions:
sensuality31, cruelty, deceit, hypocrisy, covetousness and
sordid greed. They do evil for the pure pleasure of it, most
often without reason. Out of hatred for the good, they
almost always choose their victims from among honest
people. They are the true scourges of humanity no matter
what position they occupy, and no veneer of civility can
ever cover their dishonor and ignominy.

Question 103:
Ninth class. FRIVOLOUS SPIRITS. These are ignorant,
mischievous, thoughtless and mocking spirits who meddle in
everything and respond to every question with no concern
for what is really true. They love causing petty annoyances
and little thrills, creating intrigues and misleading people into
error through deceit and mischief. To this class belong the
spirits commonly designated by the names of hobgoblins,
imps, gnomes and pixies. They are under the subjection of
higher order spirits, who often use them as we use servants.

In their communications with people, their language is often
spirited and facetious, but almost always without depth.
They seize upon human oddities and absurdities, which they
comment on with sarcasm and satire. If they take distinguished
names, it is more out of mischievousness than wickedness.

Question 104:
Eighth class. PSEUDO-LEARNED SPIRITS. The knowledge
of these spirits is quite broad but they think they know more
than they actually do. Since they have made a certain amount
of progress in some sense, their language has a serious tone
about it that can be deceptive as to their true abilities and
enlightenment. However, such is frequently nothing more
than a reflection of the prejudices and theoretical ideas they
held during their earthly life. Their language contains a few
truths mixed in with the most absurd errors, giving rise to the
presumption, pride, envy and stubbornness from which they
have not been able to free themselves.

Question 105:
Seventh class. NEUTRAL SPIRITS. These are neither
moral enough to do good nor bad enough to engage in
wickedness; rather, they vacillate between the two. They
have not raised themselves above the ordinary human
condition regarding either their moral qualities or their
intelligence. They are attached to the things of this world
and long for its coarse satisfactions.

Question 106:
Sixth class. BOISTEROUS AND DISTURBING
SPIRITS. Strictly speaking, these spirits do not form
a distinct class as to their personal qualities and
they may belong to any of the third order classes.
They frequently make their presence known through
perceptible and physical effects, such as raps, the
movement and abnormal displacement of solid objects,
the movement of the air, etc. They appear to be more
attached to matter than the others and they are the
principal agents of instability in the globe’s elements,
whether by acting upon the atmosphere, water, fire
and solid bodies, or in the entrails of the earth. One
can recognize whenever such phenomena are not due
to any fortuitous and physical cause because there is
an intentional and intelligent character about them.
Although all spirits can produce these phenomena,
higher order spirits usually leave them to subaltern ones
since they are more suitable for material rather than
intelligent matters. Thus, when the higher order spirits
deem that manifestations of this type are useful, they
use these spirits as their agents.

Second Order – Good Spirits

Question 107:
General Characteristics: Predominance of spirit over
matter; desire to do good. These spirits’ qualities and

ability to do good are in proportion to the degree of
advancement they have reached. Some possess scientific
knowledge, while others display wisdom and benevolence;
the more highly evolved ones combine knowledge with
moral qualities. Since they have not yet dematerialized
themselves completely, and depending on their class, they
still preserve stronger or weaker traces of their corporeal
existence and might display some of their former
eccentricities in their language or habits. If it were not for
this, they would be purified spirits.

They comprehend God and the infinite, and they already
enjoy the happiness of the morally upright; in addition,
they feel happy when they do good and hinder evil. The
love that unites them is a source of ineffable happiness that
cannot be affected by envy, remorse or any of the other
evil passions afflicting imperfect spirits. Nevertheless, they
must continue to undergo trials until they reach perfection.

As spirits, they encourage good thoughts in people and
dissuade them from the path of evil. They also watch over
the lives of those who have made themselves worthy and
they neutralize the influence of imperfect spirits on those
who do not yield to them.

When incarnate, they are good and benevolent toward
others; they do good for its own sake and they neither
allow themselves to be led by pride, selfishness or ambition
nor do they display hatred, bitterness, envy or jealousy.

In popular belief, this order includes the spirits called
good spirits, guardian spirits and spirits of benevolence. In
times of ignorance and superstition they were regarded as
beneficent deities.

We may divide this order into four principal groups:

Question 108:
Fifth class. BENEVOLENT SPIRITS. Their dominant
quality is kindness. They take pleasure in serving and
protecting human beings but their knowledge is limited:
their progress has occurred more in the moral sense than
in the intellectual.

Question 109:
Fourth class. LEARNED SPIRITS. These are especially
distinguished by the extent of their knowledge. They
are less concerned with moral issues because they have a
greater aptitude for scientific ones, but they only pursue
science for its usefulness. These spirits are also free of the
passions that characterize imperfect spirits.

Question 110:
Third class. WISE SPIRITS. These are characterized by
moral qualities of the highest degree. Even though they do
not possess unlimited knowledge, they are endowed with
an intellectual capacity that enables them to judge people
and things precisely.

Question 111:
Second class. HIGH ORDER SPIRITS. These combine
science, wisdom and goodness. Their language only displays
benevolence and is always noble, elevated and frequently
sublime. Their lofty status renders them more able than the
others to impart to us the most correct notions concerning
the things of the incorporeal world within the limits of the
knowledge permitted to us. They willingly communicate
with those who in good faith seek truth, and whose souls
are sufficiently freed from earthly connections to enable
such understanding. However, they turn from those who
are only motivated out of curiosity, or who, through the
influence of matter, turn from practicing the good.

When they incarnate on earth under exceptional
circumstances, they accomplish a mission of progress,
displaying to us the type of perfection to which humankind
can aspire in this world.

First Order – Pure Spirits

Question 112:
General Characteristics: No influence from matter;
absolute intellectual and moral superiority in relation to
the spirits of the other orders.

Question 113:
First and only class. These spirits have ascended through all
of the degrees of the hierarchy and have freed themselves
from all the impurities of matter. Having reached the
highest perfection possible for created beings, they have
no more trials or expiations to endure. Moreover, because
they are no longer subject to reincarnation in perishable
bodies, they live eternally in the bosom of God.

Since they are no longer subject to the needs or the vicissitudes
of material life, they enjoy unalterable bliss; nevertheless, such
bliss is not a monotonous idleness lived in perpetual contemplation.
They are the messengers and ministers of God, whose orders
they carry out to maintain universal harmony. They direct
all the spirits beneath them, help them to perfect themselves
and assign them their missions. They assist humans in their
distress and inspire them to do good or to expiate the wrongs
that keep them from supreme bliss. Sometimes these spirits
are called angels, archangels or seraphim.

Humans may communicate with them, but those who
claim to have them constantly at their orders are very
presumptuous indeed.