Sacrifice

Question 669:
The practice of human sacrifice dates back to remotest
antiquity. Why was humankind led to believe that such a
thing could be pleasing to God?

Answer:
“First, because they did not understand God as being
the source of the good. Amongst primitive peoples
matter predominated over spirit. They yielded to their
animal instincts and that is why they were generally so
cruel – their moral sense had not yet developed. Second,
primitive humans naturally believed that a living creature
had much more value in God’s sight than an inert object.
This is what led them at first to immolate animals and
humans later, because, according to their erroneous belief,
they thought the value of a sacrifice was in proportion to
the importance of the victim. Usually, whenever you buy
a gift for someone, you always select one with as great a
value as the friendship and consideration you want to
show the person. The same applied to ignorant humans
with respect to God.”

– Then the sacrificing of animals preceded that of human beings?

“There can be no doubt about it.”

– According to that explanation, didn’t human sacrifices
originate from a sentiment of cruelty?

“No, but from a mistaken concept of what was pleasing to
God – look at Abraham. In time, humans began to commit
the abuse of immolating their national enemies and even
their personal enemies. However, God has never demanded
sacrifices – animal or human. God could never be honored
by the useless destruction of God’s own creatures.”

Question 670:
Could human sacrifices ever have been pleasing to God if
performed with pious intentions?

Answer:
“No, never, but God does judge the intention. Since they
were ignorant, those ancients may have believed they were
performing a praiseworthy deed in immolating one of their
fellow beings. In that case, God would have heeded the
thought but not the deed. As they evolved, human beings
had to recognize their error and reject such sacrifices, which
could no longer be acceptable to enlightened spirits; I say
enlightened because, back then, spirits were shrouded by
the veil of matter. By their free will, however, they were
able to perceive their origin and their final purpose, and
many already intuitively understood the evil they were
committing, although in order to continue gratifying their
passions they did not cease practicing it.”

Question 671:
What should we think of so-called holy wars? Wouldn’t the
sentiment that leads fanatical peoples to think they are pleasing
God by exterminating the greatest possible number of those who
do not share their beliefs have the same origin as the sentiment
that formerly led them to sacrifice their fellow beings?

Answer:
“Such peoples are driven by evil spirits. By waging war on

their fellow beings, they act against the will of God, who
requires that people love their neighbors as themselves.
All religions, or rather, all peoples, worship the same
God whether by this or that name. Why wage a war of
extermination because a religion is different, or has not
yet attained the religious progress typical of enlightened
cultures? Peoples may be excused for not believing in the
word of the one who was animated by the Spirit of God
and sent by God, especially those who have neither seen
God nor witnessed the divine acts. But how could you
possibly expect them to believe in that word of peace when
you seek them out while bearing a sword? They must be
educated and we must seek to enable them to understand
his doctrine  – by persuasion and kindness rather than
by force and blood. Most of you do not believe in our
communications with certain mortals, so how could you
expect strangers to believe in your words when your acts
belie the doctrine you profess?”

Question 672:
Did the offering of the fruits of the earth have more merit in
God’s sight than the sacrificing of animals?

Answer:
“I have already answered that by saying that God judges the
intention; the deed itself holds little importance. Offering
the fruits of the earth rather than the blood of victims would
obviously be more agreeable to God. As we have told you
and continue to repeat, a prayer said from the bottom of the
heart is a hundred times more pleasing to God than all the
physical offerings you could make. I repeat: the intention
here is everything; the deed, nothing.”

Question 673:
Mightn’t there have been a way of rendering those offerings
more pleasing to God by consecrating them to the relief of those
who lacked the necessities of life? And in that case, mightn’t
the sacrificing of animals, performed towards such a useful
end, have been more meritorious than an abusive sacrifice
that served no useful end, or when it profited only those who
did not need anything? Wouldn’t there be something truly
pious in consecrating to the poor the firstfruits of the earth
that God has granted us?

“God always blesses those who practice the good; helping
the poor and afflicted is the best means of honoring God. I
do not mean to say that God disapproves of the ceremonies
you use for prayer; however, there is a great deal of money
spent on such ceremonies that could be employed more
usefully. God loves simplicity in all things. The person
who attaches importance to external acts and not those
of the heart is a narrow-minded spirit. Judge for yourself
as to whether or not God should be more concerned with
form than with depth.”
