Slavery

Question 829:
Are there human beings who are meant by nature to be the
property of others?

Answer:
“Every instance of subjection of one human being to
another is contrary to the law of God. Slavery is an abuse
of power and will gradually disappear with progress, as
will all other abuses.”

Any human law that establishes slavery is a law against nature
because it equates people with animals and physically and morally
degrades them.

Question 830:
When slavery belongs to the customs of a culture, are those
who practice it reprehensible since they are doing nothing
more than following a usage that seems natural to them?

Answer:
“Evil is always evil. All your sophistry will not render an evil
action good. However, the responsibility for evil is relative
to the means at your disposal to comprehend it. Those
who use the law of slavery are always guilty of violating
the law of nature; but in this, as in all things, the guilt
is relative. Because slavery was a custom among certain
cultures, people practiced it in good faith as something
that seemed natural to them. But their reason, more
developed and especially enlightened by the teachings of
Christianity, eventually showed them that the slave was
their equal before God. Then, they had no more excuse.”

Question 831:
Doesn’t the natural inequality of aptitudes place certain
peoples under the subjection of the more intelligent ones?

Answer:
“Yes, in order to enable them to develop, but not to demean
them still further by slavery. Human beings have long
regarded certain races as domesticated beasts of burden
equipped with arms and hands, and have thought that they
had the right to sell them as such. They have considered
themselves to be of purer blood. The folly of those who do
not look beyond matter! It is not the blood that must be
purer or less pure, but the spirit.” (See nos. 361-803)

Question 832:
There are those who treat their slaves humanely, who allow
them to lack nothing, and who think that freedom would
expose them to even greater deprivations. What do you say
about them?

“I say that they understand their own interests very well.
They also show the same care for their cattle and horses in
order to get more profit at market. They are not as culpable
as those who mistreat their slaves, but they nonetheless
use them as merchandise, depriving them of the right to
belong to themselves.”