The Influence of Spirits on the Events of Life

Question 525:
Do spirits exert any influence on the events of life?

Answer:
“Certainly, because they counsel you.”

– Do they exert this influence in any other way besides the thoughts
they suggest? Do they act directly in the outcome of things?

“Yes, but they never act outside natural laws.”

We erroneously think that the action of spirits must only manifest
through extraordinary phenomena. We would like for them to
come to our aid through miracles, and we always imagine them

to be armed with some kind of magic wand. But such is not the
case. Rather, their intervention always appears veiled and what is
accomplished through their concourse seems entirely natural. Thus,
for example, they cause the meeting of two persons who seem to
have met by accident; they inspire someone with the thought of
passing by such and such a place; they call a person’s attention to a
specific point if it will lead to the result they desire; thus, they work
in such a way that individuals, believing they have only followed
their own impulse, always retain their free will.

Question 526:
Since spirits can act upon matter, can they cause certain effects
with the aim of producing a given outcome? For example, a
man’s time is up; he climbs a ladder, the ladder breaks and he
dies from the fall. Did spirits cause the ladder to break so that
the man’s fate would be fulfilled?

Answer:
“It is certainly true that spirits have an influence on
matter, but in order to fulfill the laws of nature and not to
derogate from them by causing an unexpected event at a
given moment and contrary to such laws. In the example
you have just mentioned, the ladder breaks because it is
rotten or because it is not strong enough to support the
man’s weight. If it were the man’s fate to die in this way,
spirits would inspire him with the thought of climbing the
ladder, which would then break under his weight. Thus,
his death would stem from a natural cause without the
need for any kind of miracle.”

Question 527:
Let us take another example, but one in which the natural state
of matter does not intervene. A man is destined to die from
lightning; he seeks refuge under a tree, lightning strikes it and
he dies. Did spirits cause the lightning and direct it at him?

Answer:
“It is still the same thing. The lightning struck the tree at that
particular moment because the event happened according
to the laws of nature. The lightning was not directed at the
tree because the man was under it, but because he was given
the inspiration to take refuge under the tree where lightning
would strike. The tree would have been struck anyway,
whether the man had been under it or not.”

Question 528:
An ill-intentioned man shoots at another but the bullet barely
grazes him. Could a benevolent spirit have deflected the shot?

Answer:
“If the individual was not meant to be struck, the benevolent
spirit may have inspired him with the thought of moving
out of its path, or it may have confused his enemy in such
a way as to make him miss. Once the bullet is on its way,
however, it must follow the line of its trajectory.”

Question 529:
What should be thought about magic bullets that are referred
to in certain legends, and which fatality hit their mark?

Answer:
“Pure imagination. Humans delight in the marvelous but
are not content with the marvels of nature.”

– May the spirits who direct the events of life be thwarted by
spirits who have desires to the contrary?

“What God has willed must occur. If there is any delay or
hindrance, it is the divine will.”

Question 530:
Mightn’t frivolous and mocking spirits cause the little
difficulties that undo our plans and upset our calculations? In
other words, aren’t they the authors of what we commonly call
the petty troubles of human life?

Answer:
“They take pleasure in such annoyances, which are trials
for you and are meant to try your patience; but they
stop when they see that nothing comes of it. However, it
would neither be just nor correct to blame them for all
your frustrations, of which you yourselves are the main
authors through your own carelessness. Thus, if your
dish breaks, it was probably due more to your clumsiness
than the fault of spirits.”

– Do spirits who cause annoyances behave in such a manner
as a result of personal animosity, or do they attack the first
person whom they meet out of simple malice and without any
set motive?

“They act from both motives. Sometimes they are enemies
whom you have made in this life or in a previous one, and
who pursue you as a result. At other times there is no motive.”

Question 531:
Is the rancor of the beings who have harmed us on earth
extinguished with their corporeal life?

Answer:
“They often realize the injustice and the wrong they have
done, but if God allows them, they will continue to pursue
you in their hatred in order to test you further.”

– Is there a way to put an end to it, and if so, by what means?

“Yes, by praying for them and by paying back their evil
with good. That way they will end up comprehending their
errors. In all cases, if you know how to place yourselves
above their schemes, they will cease them upon seeing
they have gained nothing from them.”

Experience has shown that certain spirits continue their vengeance
from one existence to the next, and that sooner or later we will
expiate the wrongs we may have caused someone.

Question 532:
Do spirits have the power to divert misfortunes from certain
persons and to attract prosperity to them instead?

Answer:
“Not entirely, because there are misfortunes that belong
to the designs of Providence. Nevertheless, they can lessen
your pain by giving you patience and resignation.

“Also, be aware that it frequently depends on you yourselves
to divert such misfortunes, or at least to mitigate them.
God has given you intelligence so that you may use it,
and it is especially in this way that spirits help you by
suggesting favorable thoughts to you; but they only help
those who know how to help themselves. That is the
meaning of the words, ‘Seek and you will find; knock and
it will be opened to you.’

“Moreover, what looks like misfortune to you is not
always such in reality. Frequently, something good will
result from it that is far better, but that is what you do
not comprehend because you think only of the present
moment or of your own selves.”

Question 533:
Can spirits enable us to obtain the gifts of fortune if we ask
them to?

Answer:
“Sometimes, as a trial. Most often, however, they will refuse,
just as you would refuse a child’s inconsiderate request.”

– Are they good spirits or evil ones who grant such favors?

“Either. It depends on their intention, but usually they are
spirits who desire to lead you into evil, and who find an easy
means of doing so in the pleasures that fortune provides.”

Question 534:
When obstacles seem to fatally inflict our projects, is it because
of the influence of some spirit?

Answer:
“It is sometimes because of the influence of a spirit; other
times, and more frequently, it is because you yourselves
have mismanaged your projects. Position and character
have much to do with it, and if you persist in following a
path that is not right for you, spirits have nothing to do
with it – you yourselves become your own evil spirit.”

Question 535:
When something fortunate happens to us, should we thank
our protector spirit?

Answer:
“Above all, thank God, without whose permission nothing
takes place; afterward, thank the good spirits, who were
God’s agents.”

– What would happen if we forgot to thank them?

“The same thing that always happens to ingrates.”

– Nevertheless, there are many people who neither pray nor
give thanks, but for whom everything turns out well anyway.

“Yes, but it is necessary to see the end. They will pay
dearly for this temporary undeserved happiness, for the
more they have received, the more they will have to render
account for it.”