Preludes to the Return

Question 330:
Do spirits know the time when they will have to reincarnate?

Answer:
“They can sense it like a blind man who feels the fire he is
approaching. They know they must return to a body just
as you know you must die someday, but without knowing
when it will happen.” (See no. 166)

– Is reincarnation therefore a necessity of spirit life, as death is
a necessity of corporeal life?

“Yes it is.”

Question 331:
Do all spirits concern themselves with their approaching
reincarnation?

Answer:
“There are those who never give it a thought, who do not
even comprehend it. It depends on the degree of their
advancement. For some, uncertainty about their future
life is a punishment.”

Question 332:
Can spirits hasten or delay the moment of their reincarnation?

Answer:
“They may hasten it through strong desire. They may
also delay it if they recoil from the upcoming trial, since
among spirits there are cowardly and indifferent ones.
However, they do not delay it with impunity; they will
suffer for it, like those who refuse the medicine that can
restore them to health.”

Question 333:
If a spirit felt quite happy in an average situation among
discarnate spirits and had no ambition to evolve, could it
prolong its errant state indefinitely?

Answer:
“No, not indefinitely. Advancement is a necessity and
spirits sense it sooner or later. All must evolve – it is their
destiny.”

Question 334:
Is the union of a soul with a particular body predestined, or is
the choice made at the last moment?

Answer:
“The spirit is always designated beforehand. In choosing
the trial it wishes to undergo, the spirit asks to reincarnate,
and God, who sees and knows everything, sees and
knows beforehand that a particular soul will unite with a
particular body.”

Question 335:
Does a spirit have the right to choose the body it will enter, or
does it only choose the kind of life that will serve as its trial?

Answer:
“It may also choose its body because the body’s imperfections
will be the trials that will help its advancement if it
overcomes the obstacles it encounters thereby. This choice
is not always up to the spirit but it may at least ask for it.”

– At the last moment, can a spirit refuse to enter the body that
it has chosen?

“If it refuses it, it will suffer much more than one who had
not undertaken a new trial in the first place.”

Question 336:
Could it happen that there might be no spirit who is willing
to incarnate in a particular unborn child?

Answer:
“God would provide for this. When a child is to be born
alive it is always predestined to have a soul; nothing is
created without a design.”

Question 337:
Can the union of a spirit with a particular body be imposed
by God?

Answer:
“Such a union may be imposed in the same way as the
spirit’s other trials, especially when it is not yet able to
make a conscious choice about the matter. Moreover, as
an expiation, a spirit may be compelled to unite with
the body of a particular child who, by its birth and the
position it will have in the world, may become a means of
punishment for that spirit.”

Question 338:
If it just so happened that several spirits presented themselves
to occupy the same body, how would the decision be made
among them?

Answer:
“Many could very well request the same body, but in such
cases it is God who decides which one is best suited to
fulfill the mission for which the child is destined. But as I
have already said, the spirit is designated before the instant
in which it is to join the body.”

Question 339:
Is the moment of incarnation accompanied by a state of
confusion similar to the one following discarnation?

Answer:
“The confusion is much greater and especially much longer.
At death, a spirit escapes slavery; at birth, it enters it.”

Question 340:
Is the moment of incarnation a solemn one for the spirit? Does
it accomplish it as something serious and important?

Answer:
“The spirit is like a traveler embarking on a dangerous voyage,
not knowing if he will meet death on the waves ahead.”

Travelers who set out on a voyage are aware that they will be exposed
to dangers, but they do not know if they will run aground. The
same applies to a spirit. It knows the kind of trials to which it will
be submitted but does not know if it will fail.

Just as the death of the body is a kind of rebirth for the spirit,
reincarnation is a kind of death, or rather, a kind of exile and
confinement. It leaves the spirit world for the corporeal world just as,
after having been a human being, it leaves the corporeal world for the
world of spirits. A spirit knows that it will reincarnate, just as a human
being knows that he or she will die. Like humans, however, the spirit
only becomes aware of it at the last moment, when the appointed time
has arrived. Then, in that supreme moment, confusion takes hold of
it, similar to someone in the throes of death. This confusion lasts until
the new existence is firmly established. Thus, the commencement of
reincarnation is a kind of death throes for the spirit.

Question 341:
Is a spirit’s uncertainty as to the probability of successfully
enduring the trials it will experience in life a cause of anxiety
before its incarnation?

Answer:
“It is a cause of great anxiety because the trials of its existence
will either delay or hasten its evolution, depending on
whether they are borne well or badly.”

Question 342:
At the moment of its reincarnation, is the spirit accompanied
by spirit friends who come to assist with its departure from the
spirit world, just as they come to meet it when it returns?

Answer:
“That depends on the sphere the spirit inhabits. If it
belongs to a sphere in which affection reigns, spirits who
love it accompany it up to the last moment, encouraging
it and quite frequently following it during its lifetime.”

The Return to Corporeal Life

Question 343:
Are the spirit friends who follow us throughout life those who
we sometimes see in our dreams, and who show their affection
for us even though we do not recognize them physically?

Answer:
“Quite often they are. They come to visit you as you would
visit a prisoner in jail.”