The Moral and Intellectual Faculties of Humankind

Question 361:
Where do a person’s good or evil moral qualities come from?

Answer:
“They reflect the qualities of the incarnate spirit. The
purer the spirit, the more the person is inclined toward
the good.”

– So a moral person is the incarnation of a good spirit and a
cruel person that of an evil spirit?

“Yes, but it would be better to say an imperfect spirit;
otherwise, one might believe in spirits who will always
remain evil – those you call demons.”

Question 362:
What is the character of the individuals in whom frivolous
and foolish spirits are incarnated?

Answer:
“They are thoughtless, cunning, and sometimes malicious
beings.”

Question 363:
Do spirits possess any passions that do not belong to humankind?

Answer:
“No; otherwise, they would have passed them on to you.”

Question 364:
Is it one and the same spirit who gives an individual his or her
moral and intellectual qualities?

Answer:
“Certainly it is one and the same, and such qualities will
depend on the degree of the spirit’s evolution. Individuals
do not have two spirits within them.”

Question 365:
Why are the most intelligent individuals, who display a highly
evolved spirit incarnated in them, sometimes and at the same
time extremely cruel?

Answer:
“It is because the incarnate spirit is not sufficiently purified;
also, because the person yields to the influence of other spirits
who are even worse. A spirit progresses in an imperceptible
ascending forward progression, but this progress is not
accomplished simultaneously in all senses. During one period a
spirit may advance in knowledge; during another, in morality.”

Question 366:
What about the opinion according to which the various moral and
intellectual qualities of humans are the product of many different
spirits incarnate in them, each possessing a special aptitude?

Answer:
“If you reflect on it, you will realize how absurd that is. A
spirit must possess all aptitudes and in order to progress, it
needs a unified will. If a person were a collection of spirits,
this unified will would not exist. He or she would possess no
individuality, because at death all those spirits would be like
a flock of birds escaping from a cage. People often complain
that they do not understand certain things, but it is interesting
to notice how they multiply their problems when they have a
very simple and natural explanation right there in their own
hands. This notion is another example of taking the effect for
the cause; it attributes to the human being what the pagans
attributed to God. They believed in as many gods as there
were phenomena in the universe. However, even among
them sensible persons saw nothing more in those phenomena
than effects having as their cause a sole God.”

The physical and moral realms both offer us numerous points of
comparison in this respect. Humankind believed in the multiplicity
of matter as long as examining it was confined to the appearance of
phenomena. Nowadays, we understand that such varied phenomena
might very well be no more than modifications of a single elementary
matter. The various qualities and faculties are manifestations of the
same cause, which is the soul or incarnate spirit, and not several
souls – like the different sounds of an organ are the result of the same
kind of air, and not of as many types of air as there are sounds. The
theory in question would mean that when a person loses or acquires
certain aptitudes or tendencies, it indicates that certain spirits had
left the person or that others had arrived, which would make him or
her into a multiple being without individuality, and consequently,
without responsibility. This theory, moreover, is contradicted by the
numerous examples of manifestations in which spirits prove their
personality and their identity.