Heaven, Hell and Purgatory

Question 1012:
Are there circumscribed places in the universe that are
intended for the punishments and pleasures of spirits
according to their merits?

Answer:
“We have already responded to this question. Punishments
and joys are inherent to the degree of a spirit’s
perfection. Each spirit carries within itself the source of
its own happiness or unhappiness, and since spirits are
everywhere, there is no circumscribed or enclosed place
for one or the other. As for incarnate spirits, the degree of
their happiness or unhappiness depends on the evolution
of the world they inhabit.”

– Accordingly, would heaven and hell not exist as humans
have represented them?

“They are no more than figures of speech – happy and
unhappy spirits are everywhere. Nevertheless, as we have
also told you, spirits of the same order gather together
through their mutual sympathy. When perfect, they can
meet wherever they desire.”

The idea of fixed places of reward and punishment exists only in
people’s imaginations. It proceeds from their tendency to materialize
and circumscribe the things whose infinite nature they cannot
comprehend.

Question 1013:
What is to be understood by “purgatory”?

Answer:
“Physical and mental suffering; it is a period of expiation.
It is almost always on the earth that you make your own
purgatory, and that is where God enables you to expiate
your wrongs.”

What is called purgatory is also a figure of speech that should not be
understood as some definite place, but rather the state of imperfect
spirits who are in expiation until their complete purification raises
them to the plane of the blissful spirits. Since this purification
occurs over several incarnations, purgatory consists in the trials of
corporeal life.

Question 1014:
How do you explain the fact that spirits who are known to be

highly evolved because of the language they use have given to
serious individuals answers on hell and purgatory that are in
line with commonly accepted ideas?

“They speak a language that can be understood by the
individuals who question them. When such individuals
are highly imbued with certain ideas, these spirits do not
want to shock them too suddenly in order not to harm
their convictions. If a spirit were to forget about verbal
precautions and to say to a Muslim that Mohammed was
not a prophet, it would be very poorly received.”

– We can understand this on the part of spirits who wish
to instruct us, but how may it be explained that, when
questioned about their situation, spirits have responded that
they were suffering the tortures of hell or purgatory?

“When they are of a low order and are not completely
dematerialized, spirits retain a portion of their earthly
ideas and translate their impressions using terms that are
familiar to them. They find themselves in surroundings
that do not permit them to probe the future except in a
deficient way. This is the reason why errant or recently
discarnated spirits usually speak just as they would have if
they were still incarnate. Hell may be translated as meaning
a life of extremely painful trials with the uncertainty that it
will ever end. Purgatory is also a life of trials, but with the
awareness of a better future. Whenever you are suffering a
great deal of pain, don’t you say that you are suffering like
hell? These are also nothing more than words uttered as a
figure of speech.”

Question 1015:
What should be understood by a tormented soul?

Answer:
“An errant and suffering soul, uncertain about its future, and
to whom you can provide the solace it frequently begs for
when it comes to communicate with you.” (See no. 664.)

Question 1016:
In what sense should the word heaven be understood?

Answer:
“Do you believe that it is a place like the Elysian Fields
of the ancients, where all the good spirits are confusedly
crowded together with no other concern than that of
enjoying an eternity of passive bliss? No. It is universal
space – the planets, the stars and all the highly evolved
worlds on which spirits enjoy all their faculties without
the tribulations of material life or the anguish inherent to
less evolved stages.”

Question 1017:
Some spirits have said that they inhabit the fourth, the fifth
heaven, etc. What is meant by this?

Answer:
“You asked them which heaven they inhabit because you
have the idea of many superimposed heavens resembling
the stories of a house; thus, they merely responded
according to your own language. However, for them, the
words fourth or fifth heaven express different degrees of
purification, and consequently, of happiness. It is the same
when a spirit is asked if it is in hell. If it is unhappy, it will
say yes, because for it hell is synonymous with suffering,
although it knows very well that it is not a furnace. A
pagan spirit would respond that it is in Tartarus.”

The same applies to other analogous expressions, such as the city
of flowers, the city of the elect, the first, second or third sphere,
etc., which are no more than allegories employed by certain spirits,
whether as figures of speech, whether from ignorance of the reality of
things or whether from ignorance of the simplest scientific concepts.

According to the former narrow idea of fixed places of punishment
and reward, and especially according to the opinion that the earth
was the center of the universe, and that the sky formed a vault in
which there was a region of stars, heaven was placed up above and
hell down below; hence the expressions to ascend into heaven, to be
in highest heaven, to be cast down into hell, etc. Now that science has
demonstrated that the earth is no more than one of the smallest
worlds among so many millions of others, which gives it no special
importance; that it has traced the earth’s formation and described
its constitution; that it has proven that space is infinite in such a
way that there is neither up nor down in the universe, it has become
necessary to reject placing heaven above the clouds and hell in the
lower regions. As for purgatory, no fixed place has ever been assigned
to it. Concerning such matters, it was reserved for Spiritism to give
the most rational, fundamental, and at the same time, the most
consoling explanation to humankind. Thus, we can say that we
carry our hell and our heaven within ourselves, and that we find
our purgatory in our incarnation, in our corporeal or physical lives.

Question 1018:
In what sense should we understand the words of Christ, “My
kingdom is not of this world?”

Answer:
“Christ was responding figuratively. He wanted to say
that he only reigned over pure and unselfish hearts. He
is in every place where love and goodness rule; however,
humans, greedy for the things of this world, are attached
to the things of earth and not to him.”

Question 1019:
Will the kingdom of the good ever be realized on earth?

Answer:
“The good will reign on earth when, among the spirits who
come to inhabit it, the good outnumber the evil ones. They
will then enable love and justice – the source of goodness
and of happiness – to reign on earth. It is through moral
progress and the practice of the laws of God that humans
will attract good spirits to the earth and repel the evil ones.
However, the evil ones will only leave after humans have
banished pride and selfishness from the planet.

“The transformation of humankind has been predicted,
and the time has come for all progressive individuals to
hasten it. It will be implemented through the incarnation

of more-evolved spirits, who will comprise a new
generation on the earth. Then the spirits of evil, who
are reaped daily by death, and all those who try to deter
the forward advancement of things will be excluded, for
they will be out of place among humans of high morality,
whose happiness they would disturb. They will go to
newer, less-advanced worlds to fulfill pain-filled missions,
where they will be able to labor for their own progress and
at the same time labor for the progress of their brothers
and sisters who are even less advanced. Don’t you see in
such an exclusion from a transformed earth the sublime
image of Paradise Lost? Also, don’t you see in the humans
who have come to the earth under similar conditions,
bringing within themselves the seeds of their passions and
the traces of their primitive inferiority, the no-less sublime
image of original sin? Considered in this way, original sin
refers to the still imperfect nature of humans, who are only
responsible for themselves and for their own wrongs, and
not for those of their parents.

“All of you, men and women of faith and goodwill, work
therefore with zeal and courage for the great work of
regeneration, for you will reap a hundredfold the grain of
wheat that you have sown. Unfortunate are those who close
their eyes to the light, for they are preparing long centuries
of darkness and sorrow for themselves! Unfortunate are
those who place all their joys in the things of this world,
for they will suffer more privations than the pleasures they
have had. And above all, unfortunate are the selfish, for
they will not find anyone to help them bear the burden of
their miseries.”