Prayer

Question 658:
Is prayer pleasing to God?

Answer:
“A prayer is always pleasing to God when spoken from
the heart, for intent is everything to God. A prayer from
the heart is preferable to one you read no matter how
beautiful it may be if you read more with the lips than
with the thought. Prayer is pleasing to God when it is
offered with faith, fervor and sincerity. Do not believe,
however, that God is touched by the prayer of vain, proud
or selfish people, unless their prayer represents an act of
sincere repentance and true humility.”

Question 659:
What is the general character of prayer?

Answer:
“Prayer is an act of worship. Praying to God is thinking
of God, drawing nearer to God, putting one’s self in
communication with God. Through prayer we may do
three things: praise, ask and thank.”

Question 660:
Does prayer make people better?

Answer:
“Yes, because those who pray fervently and confidently
strengthen themselves against the temptations of evil, and
God sends them good spirits to assist them. Such help is
never refused when sincerely asked for.”

– Why is it that certain persons who pray a great deal are
nevertheless of a very evil, jealous, envious, cantankerous
character, lacking in benevolence and forbearance – even cruel?

“What is essential is not to pray a great deal, but to
pray rightly. Such persons think that all the merit lies
in the length of the prayer, and they shut their eyes to
their own defects. For them, prayer is an occupation,
a use of time, but it is not self-examination. It is not
the remedy per se that is ineffectual, but the manner
in which it is applied.”

Question 661:
May one effectively ask God to forgive one’s sins?

Answer:
“God knows how to discern between good and evil; prayer
does not hide sins. Those who ask God to forgive their
sins do not receive forgiveness unless they change their
conduct. Good deeds are the best prayers, for deeds are
worth more than words.”

Question 662:
May one pray effectively for others?

Answer:
“The spirit of the one who prays acts out of a will to
do good. Through prayer, it attracts good spirits who
cooperate in the good it desires to do.”

Through our thought and will, we possess an inner power of action
that extends far beyond the limits of our corporeal sphere. A prayer
for others is an act of that will. If it is ardent and sincere, it can
call good spirits to the aid of those for whom we ask it so that the
good spirits may suggest good thoughts to them and give them the
needed strength for body and soul. But even then, the prayer from
the heart is everything; that from the lips is nothing.

Question 663:
Can the prayers we offer for ourselves modify the nature of our
trials and change their course?

Answer:
“Your trials are in God’s hands and there are those that
must be endured to the very end; however, God always
takes resignation into account. Prayer attracts good spirits
who give you strength to courageously endure your trials;
thus, they seem less difficult to you. As we have already
stated, prayer is never useless when offered rightly, because
it provides strength, which in itself is a good result. Heaven
helps those who help themselves – you know this. Besides,
God could not change the workings of nature to suit the
taste of each and every individual, since what may be a great
evil from your narrow point of view and for your ephemeral
life is often a great good within the general order of the
universe. Furthermore, how many misfortunes are authored
by people themselves through their own improvidence or
wrongdoing? They are punished for their specific sins.
Nevertheless, your just requests are heard more often than
you might suppose. You think that God has not heard your
prayer because there has been no miracle on your behalf,
while you have in fact received divine assistance through
means so natural that it seems to have happened by chance
or by necessity. Most often, God suggests the thought
needed for you to get yourselves out of your predicament.”

Question 664:
Is it any use praying for the dead and for suffering spirits,
and if so, how can our prayers provide them consolation and
shorten their sufferings? Do our prayers have the power to
appease the justice of God?

“Prayer has no effect in changing God’s designs, but
the soul for whom you pray experiences relief because
it witnesses the interest you show in it, and because an
unhappy soul is always consoled when it encounters other
charitable souls who share in its suffering. Moreover,
through prayer you may incite it to repentance and the
desire to do what is needed to become happy. It is in this
sense that you can shorten its affliction if on its part it
contributes with its own goodwill. Aroused by prayer,
such a desire to improve attracts to the suffering spirit
other spirits, who come to enlighten, console and give it
hope. Jesus prayed for the straying sheep. In doing so, he
showed you that you are culpable if you do not pray for
those who are the most in need.”

Question 665:
What is to be thought of the opinion that rejects praying for
the dead because it is not prescribed in the Gospels?

Answer:
“Christ said to all humankind, ‘Love one another.’ This
recommendation implies using all possible means to
demonstrate love toward others, but without going into
any details regarding the way to reach this goal. If it is
true that nothing can turn God aside from applying divine
justice to every one of a spirit’s actions, it is no less true
that the prayer you direct to God on behalf of those who
inspire your love is for them a testimony of remembrance
that consoles them and contributes toward relieving their
sufferings. They can be helped when – and only when –
they show the slightest repentance, but it will nevertheless
cause them never to forget that a sympathetic soul has
been concerned about them. It will instill in them the
sweet belief that your intercession has been useful. This
necessarily results on their part in a sentiment of love for
the one who has shown this proof of friendship and piety.
Consequently, the love recommended to humankind by
Christ has increased between them, and both have obeyed
the law of love and union of all beings, the divine law that
must lead to unity – the spirit’s objective and purpose.”56

Question 666:
May we pray to spirits?

Answer:
“You may pray to good spirits since they are the
messengers of God and the executors of the divine designs.
Their power, however, is in proportion to their degree
of evolution and always derives from the Creator of all
things, without whose permission nothing is done. For
this reason, the prayers that we address to them are only
effective if pleasing to God.”