The Concealed Influence of Spirits on Our Thoughts and Actions

Question 459:
Do spirits have any influence on our thoughts and actions?

Answer:
“Their influence on you in this regard is greater than you
suppose, for very frequently it is they who guide you.”

Question 460:
Do we have our own thoughts plus others that are suggested to us?

Answer:
“Your soul is a spirit who thinks by itself; nevertheless,
you must have noticed that many thoughts occur to you
all at the same time with regards to the same subject, and
that they frequently contradict one another. Well, they
are always a combination of your own ideas and other
spirits’ ideas, and this is what renders you uncertain –
you have several ideas within your mind battling it out
with each other.”

Question 461:
How can we distinguish between our own thoughts and those
suggested to us?

Answer:
“When a thought is suggested to you, it is like a voice speaking
to you. Your own thoughts are usually those that occur to you
at first impulse. Actually, you should not concern yourselves
with such a distinction, and it is often more useful not even
to know about it – you act more freely. If you make the right
decision, you will act more willingly; if you make the wrong
one, your responsibility will be greater.”

Question 462:
Do individuals of intelligence and genius always draw their
ideas from within themselves?

Answer:
“Their ideas sometimes arise from their own spirit, but
frequently they are suggested to them by other spirits who
deem them capable of understanding them and worthy of
transmitting them. When they cannot find ideas within
themselves, they appeal for inspiration; they are making
an evocation without even suspecting it.”

If it were useful for us to be able to distinguish between our own
thoughts and those suggested to us, God would have given us the
means to do so, just as God has given us the means to distinguish
between day and night. But when a matter seems va­gue, it must be
so for our own good.

Question 463:
It is sometimes said that the first impulse is always the best. Is
this correct?

Answer:
“It can be good or bad, according to the nature of the
incarnate spirit. It is always good for the one who listens
to good inspirations.”

Question 464:
How can we tell if a suggested thought comes from a good or
an evil spirit?

Answer:
“Study the matter: good spirits give only good advice; it is
your responsibility to make the distinction.”

Question 465:
For what purpose do imperfect spirits induce us to evil?

Answer:
“To make you suffer as they themselves do.”

– Does it actually lessen their sufferings?

“No, but they do so anyway out of envy at seeing happier
beings.”

– What kinds of suffering do they wish to inflict on us?

“Those that result from belonging to a lower order and
from being far from God.”

Question 466:
Why does God permit spirits to incite us to evil?

Answer:
“Imperfect spirits are meant as instruments for testing the
faith and constancy of individuals in the practice of the
good. As a spirit, you must progress in the knowledge of
the infinite, and you experience the trials of evil in order
to arrive at the good. Our mission is to place you upon the
upright path. When evil influences act on you, however,
it is you yourself who call to them out of your desire for
evil. Little-evolved spirits come to help you in evil when
you have the will to commit it. However, they cannot help
you in evil except when you actually desire to indulge in
it. If you are inclined to murder, very well, there will be a
swarm of spirits who will maintain that thought in your
mind. However, there will also be others who will try to
influence you for good, and this re-equalizes the balance,
leaving you as master of yourself.”

It is thus that God leaves to our conscience the choice of the course
we must follow and the freedom to yield to either of the opposing
influences acting on us.

Question 467:
Can people avoid the influence of spirits who incite them to evil?

Answer:
“Yes, because they only attach themselves to those who solicit
them with their desires or attract them with their thoughts.”

Question 468:
Do spirits whose influence is repelled by an individual’s will
finally give up on their attempts?

Answer:
“What else could they do? When they have nothing to
do, they leave. Nevertheless, they attentively watch for a
favorable moment, as the cat attentively watches the mouse.”

Question 469:
By what means can we neutralize the influence of evil spirits?

Answer:
“By doing good and placing all your trust in God,
you repel their influence and you destroy the power
they desire to have over you. Guard yourselves against
listening to the suggestions of spirits who excite evil
thoughts in your mind, those who incite discord and
arouse in you all the evil passions. Above all, distrust
spirits who flatter your pride, for they are attacking you
at your weakest point. That is why Jesus teaches you to
say in the Lord’s Prayer, ‘Lord, do not let us fall into
temptation, but deliver us from evil!’”

Question 470:
The spirits who seek to lead us into evil and who thus put our
moral firmness to the test, have they received a mission to do
this, and if it is in fact a mission for them to fulfill, will they
be responsible for doing so?

Answer:
“Spirits never receive a mission to do evil. When they do
evil deeds, it is by their own will and they will have to
suffer the consequences. God may let them test you but
never directly orders them to; it is your responsibility to
repel them.”

Question 471:
When we experience a sensation of anguish, of indefinable
anxiety or inner satisfaction without a known cause, does it
result from our physical disposition at the time?

Answer:
“It is almost always the effect of communications you have
with spirits without even suspecting it – or those you have
had with them during sleep.”

Question 472:
Are spirits who want to incite us to evil limited to taking
advantage of the circumstances in which we find ourselves, or
can they create such circumstances?

Answer:
“They may take advantage of a circumstance, but frequently
they cause it, pushing you without your being aware of it
toward the object of your ambition. Thus, for example, a
man finds a quantity of money by the road. Spirits have
not placed the money there but they may have instilled in
the man the thought of going in that direction. Then, they
suggest he keep the money, while others suggest he return
it to its rightful owner. The same process happens with all
other temptations.”