The Origin and Knowledge of Natural Law

Question 619:
Has God provided all humans the means of knowing God’s law?

Answer:
“All may know about it, but not all understand it.
Moral persons and those who desire to examine it are
the ones who understand it best. Nevertheless, all will
understand it someday because such understanding is
necessary for progress.”

The justice of multiple human incarnations springs from this
principle because in each new existence humans’ intelligence
becomes more developed and they better comprehend what is good
and what is evil. If everything had to be accomplished in a single
existence, what would be the fate of the many millions who die
every day in the brutishness of the primitive state or in the darkness
of ignorance simply because they were born into a situation that
did not enable them to become enlightened? (See nos. 171 to 222)

Question 620:
Before its union with the body, does the soul comprehend
God’s law more clearly than after incarnating?

Answer:
“It comprehends God’s law according to the degree of
its perfection, and it preserves an intuitive memory of it
after uniting with the body. However, evil human instincts
often cause it to forget it.”

Question 621:
Where is God’s law written?

Answer:
“In the conscience.”

– Since humans carry God’s law in their conscience, why does
it have to be revealed to them?

“They have forgotten and disregarded it; but God has
willed for them to remember it.”

Question 622:
Has God endowed certain individuals with the mission of
revealing the divine law?

Answer:
“Yes, certainly. In every age individuals have received this
mission. They are high order spirits who have incarnated
with the purpose of enabling humankind to progress.”

Question 623:
Haven’t those who were meant to instruct humankind in
God’s law sometimes erred, and haven’t they often led others
astray through erroneous principles?

Answer:
“People may have been led astray by those who were not
actually inspired by God, and who, out of ambition,

regarded themselves as having a mission that they did not in
fact have. Nevertheless, they were geniuses and great truths
could often be found even in the midst of their errors.”

Question 624:
What are the characteristics of true prophets?

Answer:
“True prophets are moral individuals inspired by God,
and whom we may recognize by their words and deeds.
God does not employ a liar to teach the truth.”

Question 625:
What is the perfect standard that God has offered to
humankind as a guide and model?

Answer:
“Look at Jesus.”

Jesus is the highest standard of moral perfection to which humankind
may aspire on earth. God offers him as the most perfect model, and
the doctrine he taught is the purest expression of God’s law because
he was animated by the divine spirit and was the purest being that
has ever walked the earth.

If some of those who claimed to teach God’s law to humans have
sometimes led them astray with erroneous principles, it is because they
allowed themselves to be dominated by strong earthly sentiments,
and because they confused the laws regulating the conditions of the
life of the soul with those regulating the life of the body. Many of
them presented as divine laws what were really only human laws,
created to serve their own passions and to dominate others.

Question 626:
Have the divine or natural laws been revealed to humankind
only by Jesus? Before him, were they only known by intuition?

Answer:
“Haven’t we stated that they are written everywhere? From
the remotest times, all who have meditated on wisdom
have been able to understand and teach these laws.
Though their teachings were incomplete, they prepared
the ground to receive the seed. Since the divine laws are
written in the book of nature, men and women are able
to understand them as soon as they want to look into
them. That is why the precepts of the divine laws have
been proclaimed by moral persons in all ages and also why
we have encountered their elements – though incomplete
or altered by ignorance and superstition – in the moral
doctrines of all cultures that have left barbarism.”

Question 627:
Since Jesus has already taught the true laws of God, of what
value are the teachings given by the Spirits? Do they really
have anything more to teach us?

Answer:
“Jesus’ teachings were frequently allegorical and in the
form of parables because he spoke according to his time
and place, but today the truth must be made intelligible
for all. Thus, it is necessary to explain God’s laws more
fully and elaborate on them because there are so few who
understand them and still fewer who actually practice
them. Our mission is to awaken eyes and ears in order
to confound the proud and unmask the hypocrites who
display virtue and religion outwardly in order to hide their
inner turpitudes. The teaching of the Spirits must be clear
and without error so that no one can feign ignorance and
so that all may judge it and evaluate it with their own
reason. We are in charge of preparing the Kingdom of
God announced by Jesus, and that is why no one should
be able to interpret the law of God according to his or her
own passions or to distort the meaning of a law that is
entirely love and charity.”

Question 628:
Why hasn’t the truth always been within everyone’s reach?

Answer:
“Each thing must come in its own time. Truth is like light:
we must accustom ourselves to it little by little; otherwise,
it dazzles us.

“There has never been a time in which God allowed
humankind to receive communications as complete and

instructive as the ones being given today. As you know,
in ancient times there were only a few individuals who
were in possession of what they regarded as a sacred
science, and which they kept as a mystery from other
individuals, whom they considered as being profane.
You must understand from what you know of the laws
governing spirit phenomena that those ancients received
only fragmentary truths amongst an ambiguous, often
highly symbolic collection. Nevertheless, enlightened
individuals nowadays should not discount any ancient
philosophical system, tradition or religion, because
they all contain the seeds of great truths. Although they
seem to contradict one another and are scattered among
unfounded embellishments, today they are much easier
to comprehend, thanks to the key that Spiritism has
provided. It is a key to an infinite number of things that
until now seemed unreasonable, but whose reality has
recently been irrefutably demonstrated. Therefore, do not
fail to make those materials subjects of your study. They
are very rich in teachings and may contribute a great deal
to your education.”