Theoretical Essay on Sensation in Spirits

Question 257:
The body is the instrument of pain; if not its primary cause,
at least its immediate cause. The soul has the perception of
such pain and this perception is the effect. The memory
that it preserves of pain can be very acute, but this does
not imply any physical sensation. Actually, cold and heat
cannot disorganize the soul’s tissues – a soul can neither
freeze nor burn. Every day, do we not see the memory of
or the concern about a physical ill producing its effects,
even to the extent of causing death?

We all know that individuals who have undergone an
amputation feel pain in the limb that no longer exists. The
limb is obviously neither the site nor the starting point of
the pain; the brain itself has simply retained the impression.
Likewise, we can assume there is something similar in the
sufferings of spirits after death. An in-depth study of the
perispirit, which plays such an important role in all spirit
phenomena, such as vaporous or tangible apparitions,
in the state of the spirit at the moment of death, in the
so-frequent notion that it is still alive, in the frightening
situation of suicides, in those who have undergone capital
punishment, in those who have overindulged in material
pleasures, and so many other facts, have shed light on this
question, providing the explanations that we are presenting
here in summary.

The perispirit is the link that unites the spirit with the
matter of the body. It is drawn from the environment, from
the universal fluid. At the same time, it contains electricity,
magnetic fluid and to a certain extent, inert matter. We
could say that it is the quintessence of matter. It is the
beginning of organic life but not of mental life, because
that belongs to the spirit. The perispirit is also the agent
of external sensations. In the body, these sensations are
localized in the organs that serve as their channels. When
the body is destroyed, the sensations become generalized,
and that is why a spirit does not say that it suffers more in its
head than in its feet. Moreover, we have to be on our guard
against being confused as to the sensations of the perispirit,
which have become independent of the sensations of the
body; we can only take the latter as a term of comparison
and not as an analogy. Freed from the body, the spirit may
suffer, but this suffering is not the same as that of the body;
however, it is not an exclusively mental suffering either, like
remorse, because the spirit may complain of being hot or
cold. Nevertheless, it suffers no more in summer than in
winter. We have seen spirits pass through flames without
feeling any pain, showing that temperature has no effect on
them. The pain they do feel is not physical pain per se; it
is a vague inner sensation, of which the spirit is not always
aware because the pain is not localized or produced by an
outside agent. It is a memory rather than a reality, but a very
painful memory nonetheless. At other times, it is more than
a memory, as we shall see.

Experience has taught us that the perispirit disengages
itself more or less slowly from the body at the moment
of death. During the first few moments, the spirit does
not comprehend its situation – it does not think it has
died, because it feels alive. It sees its body at its side and
knows that it is its own, but does not understand why
they are separate. This state lasts as long as there is a link
between the body and the perispirit. A suicide once said
to us, “No, I’m not dead,” and added, “yet, I can feel the
worms devouring me.” Of course, the worms were not
devouring the perispirit, let alone the spirit, but only
the body. Since the separation between the body and the
perispirit was not yet complete, there continued to be a
mental repercussion that transmitted the sensation to the
body. Repercussion is not quite the right term, however,
since it may imply a highly physical effect. It was rather
the sight of what was happening within the body itself;
the perispirit was still attached, producing an illusion
which was taken as real. Thus, it was not a memory of
a past occurrence – its body had never been devoured by
worms during life – but a current sensation. With these
elements in mind, let us see what conclusions we might
draw from these facts by studying them carefully. During
life, the body receives impressions and transmits them
to the spirit via the perispirit, which probably comprises
what is called the neural fluid.45 When it is dead, the body
no longer feels anything because it has neither spirit nor
perispirit. When disengaged from the body, the perispirit
experiences sensation, but since sensation no longer reaches
it via a limited channel, it becomes generalized. Since the
perispirit is only an agent of transmission – because only
the spirit possesses consciousness – we may deduce that if
the perispirit could exist without the spirit, the perispirit
would feel no more than the dead body. Likewise, if the
spirit had no perispirit, it would be inaccessible to any
painful sensation whatsoever, as is the case with completely
purified spirits. We know that the more a spirit purifies
itself, the more etherealized the essence of its perispirit
becomes, so that material influences diminish as the spirit
progresses; that is, as its perispirit becomes less coarse.

You might say, however, that if pleasant sensations are
transmitted to the spirit via the perispirit, so are unpleasant
ones, and if a pure spirit is inaccessible to some, it must be
equally inaccessible to others: yes, without a doubt, but only
those sensations coming from the influence of the matter
with which we are familiar. The sound of our instruments
and the smell of our flowers make no impression whatsoever
on a pure spirit, yet it enjoys inner sensations of indefinable
enchantment, of which we do not have the slightest idea,
because they are as imperceptible to us as light is to those born
blind. We know they exist, but in what way? Our knowledge
ends there. We know that spirits have perception, sensation,
hearing and sight, but these faculties are attributes of their
whole being, not only of certain organs, as is the case with
human beings. But once again, how is this so? That is what we
do not know. The spirits themselves cannot explain it to us,
because our language was not made to express ideas that we
cannot conceive of, just as in the language of primitive tribes
there are no terms for the expression of our arts, sciences and
philosophical doctrines.

In saying that spirits are inaccessible to the impressions of
matter, we are referring to the most evolved spirits, whose
etherealized envelope finds no analogy in this world. It is
different with spirits whose perispirit is denser, because
they perceive our sounds and our odors, but not via a
limited part of their organism as when alive. We may say
that molecular vibrations are felt throughout their entire
being and therefore in their sensorium commune – the spirit
itself – but in a different manner, and perhaps producing
a different impression, which may cause a modification
in their perception. They hear the sound of our voice, and
yet they can understand us without the need of speech –
the mere transmission of thought is sufficient, attesting
to the fact that their mental acuity becomes greater the
more dematerialized they become. The faculty of sight
is independent of light; it is an essential attribute of the
soul (for which darkness does not exist) and shows itself
to be broader and more penetrating among those who
are more purified. Therefore, the soul or spirit possesses
within itself the faculty of all perceptions. During
corporeal life, these perceptions are obliterated by the
denseness of our organs; during extra-corporeal life,
they become increasingly liberated as the semi-material
envelope becomes more and more etherealized.

Drawn from the surrounding environment, the perispirit
varies according to the nature of the different worlds. In
passing from one world to another, spirits change this
envelope as we change our clothes when we go from
summer to winter or from pole to equator. When they
come to visit us, the more evolved spirits assume a terrestrial
perispirit, and so their perceptions are similar to those of
common spirits; however, all spirits, whether highly evolved
or not, only hear and feel what they want to hear and feel.

Since they do not have sensorial organs, they can render
their perceptions active or inactive at will, although there
is one thing they are compelled to hear: the counsels of
good spirits. Their sight is always active but they can
become invisible to one another. Depending on the class
they belong to, they can conceal themselves from those who
are less purified but not from those who are more so. In
the first moments after death, a spirit’s sight is always dim
and confused, but becomes clearer as it frees itself from the
body, and can acquire even more clarity than it had during
life, including the possibility of penetrating objects that are
opaque to us. As for the extension of a spirit’s sight into
indefinite space, into the future and the past, that depends
on the spirit’s degree of purity and evolution.

You might say, “This entire theory is not very reassuring. We
had thought that, once freed from our dense envelope – the
instrument of our pains – we wouldn’t suffer anymore. Now
you’re telling us that we can continue to suffer; whether it
is one way or another it is suffering nonetheless.” Alas, yes,
we can still suffer a great deal and for a long time, but we
might also no longer experience any suffering at all from the
moment we leave this corporeal life behind.

The sufferings of this world are sometimes the result of a
cause outside ourselves, but more often they result from
our own volition. If we trace them back to their origin, we
will see that most of them are due to causes we could have
avoided. How many ills, how many infirmities do people
owe solely to their excesses and ambitions – in a word, to
their passions? If individuals always lived judiciously and
never abused anything, if they always had simple tastes
and modest desires, they would save themselves many
tribulations. The same applies to spirits: the sufferings they
undergo always result from the manner in which they lived
on the earth. Of course, they will no longer have gout or
rheumatism, but they will experience other sufferings that
are not any smaller. We have seen that such sufferings are
the result of the links that still exist between the spirit and
matter, that the more the spirit is disconnected from the
influence of matter, that is, the more dematerialized it is,
the fewer painful sensations it will suffer. Starting with its
present life, it depends on the spirit itself to break free from
the influence of matter because it has free will and therefore
the ability to choose to act or not. Let the spirit conquer its
animal passions; let it entertain no hatred, envy, jealousy
or pride; let it cease to be dominated by selfishness; let it
purify itself through good sentiments; let it practice the
good; let it not give to the things of this world any more
importance than they deserve. Thereby, even while in its
corporeal envelope, it will have purified itself by detaching
from matter, and when it leaves the body behind, it will not
suffer any longer from its influence. The physical sufferings
the spirit underwent in the past will leave no painful
memory or disagreeable impressions, because these affected
only the body. The spirit is happy to be relieved of them,
and its peaceful conscience will exempt it from all mental
anguish. Concerning this subject, we have questioned many
thousands of spirits who belonged to every social class and
to every position. We have studied them at every period
of their spirit life from the moment they left their body
behind. We have followed them step by step in that life
beyond the grave in order to observe the changes that had
taken place in their ideas and sensations. In this respect, the
most ordinary individuals were the ones who furnished us
with the most precious elements of study. We have seen that
their sufferings are always related to their conduct – they
must suffer the consequences – and that this new existence
is a source of ineffable happiness for those who have taken
the path of the good. Hence, it follows that for those who
suffer, it is because they have wanted to, and they have only
themselves to blame in the other world as in this one.