The Characteristics of a Moral Person

Question 918:
By what signs can we recognize in individuals the real progress
that will raise their spirit within the spirit hierarchy?

Answer:
“The spirit proves its progress when all the actions of its
corporeal life consist in practicing the law of God, and
when it understands the spirit life beforehand.”

Truly moral individuals are those who practice the law of justice,
love and charity in its most complete purity. If they interrogate their
conscience concerning their actions, they will ask if they have not
violated that law, if they have not committed any evil, if they have
done all the good that is within their power to do, if no one has a
complaint against them, and lastly, if they have done to others what
they would want others to do unto them.

Those possessing the sentiment of charity and love for their neighbor
do good for its own sake, without hope of reward, and they sacrifice
their self-interest for justice’s sake.

They are good, humane and benevolent toward all because they
see their own brothers and sisters in all humans regardless of race
or belief.

If God has given them power and wealth, they regard it as A
DEPOSIT that they must use for the good, but this does not make
them vain, because they know that God, who has given them power
and wealth, can also take them away.

If the social order has placed persons under their care, they treat
them with kindness and benevolence because they are equals before

God. They use their authority to build them up morally, and not to
crush them with their pride.

They are tolerant of the weaknesses of others, for they know that
they themselves need tolerance, and they remember the words of
Christ, “Let him that is without sin cast the first stone.”

They are not vindictive: following Jesus’ example, they forgive
offenses and only remember benefits because they know that they
will be forgiven as they have forgiven.

Finally, they respect in others all the rights that the laws of nature
have granted them, as they would desire their own to be respected.