Physical and Moral Likeness

Question 207:
Parents almost always transmit a physical likeness to their
children. Do they also transmit a moral likeness?

Answer:
“No, because their souls or spirits are different. The body
proceeds from the body but the spirit does not proceed
from the spirit. There is no other link than blood kinship
among descendants.”

– Where does the moral likeness that sometimes exists between
parents and children come from?

“They are sympathetic37 spirits, attracted by similarities of
inclination.”

Question 208:
Don’t the spirits of the parents exert an influence on their
children after birth?

Answer:
“A very great influence because, as we have already said,
spirits should aid in one another’s progress. As it is, the
spirits of the parents have the mission of developing their
children through education. This is a task for them – if
they fail to perform it, they will be guilty.”

Question 209:
Why is it that good and virtuous parents sometimes have
wicked children? In other words, why don’t the good qualities
of the parents always, out of affinity, attract good spirits as
their children?

Answer:
“Wicked spirits may ask for good parents in the hope that
their counsels will guide them along a better path. God
often grants their wish.”

Question 210:
Through their thoughts and prayers, can parents attract a
good spirit instead of an imperfect one to indwell the body of
their child?

Answer:
“No. They can, however, improve the spirit of the child
to whom they have given birth, and whom has been
entrusted to them – it is their duty. Ill-natured children
are a trial for their parents.”

Question 211:
Where does the likeness of character come from, which so often
exists among siblings, especially between twins?

Answer:
“They are sympathetic spirits who are attracted by similar
sentiments, and who are happy to be together.”

Question 212:
In children whose bodies were born joined, and who have
some of their organs in common, are there two spirits, that is,
two souls?

Answer:
“Yes, but their resemblance often makes them seem to you
as though there is only one.”

The Plurality of Existences

Question 213:
But if spirits incarnate as twins out of sympathy38, where
does the aversion come from that may sometimes be noted
between them?

Answer:
“It is not a rule that twins must be sympathetic spirits. Evil
spirits may desire to struggle together on the stage of life.”

Question 214:
What are we to think of the stories of children fighting in their
mother’s womb?

Answer:
“A figure of speech! In order to portray their hatred as
ingrained, it is figuratively set before birth. Humans
usually do not make sufficient allowance for images that
are intended to be merely poetic.”

Question 215:
Where does the distinctive character that we observe in each
culture come from?

Answer:
“Like humans, spirits also form families through similarities
in tendencies. The purity of such tendencies depends on
how evolved the spirits are. Additionally, cultures are large
families where sympathetic spirits congregate, and the
tendency that leads members of these families to congregate
is the source of the individual likenesses that exist within
the distinctive character of each culture. Do you think
that good and humane spirits would seek to live among
unrefined and cruel people? No. Spirits are attracted to like­
minded cultures, just as they are attracted to like-minded
individuals. They look for their own group.”

Question 216:
In their new lives, do individuals retain any traces of their
moral character from former ones?

Answer:
“Yes, that can happen. However, as spirits evolve, they
change, and their social position may change as well. If

38 Sympathy: “Harmony of or agreement in feeling, as between persons or on the part of one
person with respect to another. The harmony of feeling existing between persons of like
tastes or opinion, or of congenial dispositions” (ibid.) – Tr.

a master becomes a slave, his tastes will be very different
and it will be difficult for you to recognize him. Since
a spirit is the same spirit in its various incarnations, its
manifestations can have certain likenesses from one to
the next. However, these will be modified through the
customs of its new position until a notable improvement
has completely changed its character. For example, the
one who was proud and cruel can become humble and
humane if it has repented.”

Question 217:
During their different incarnations, do individuals retain
any vestiges of their physical character from previous lives?

Answer:
“The body is destroyed and the new one has no connection
with the old. Nevertheless, the spirit is reflected in the
body. Although the body is only matter, it is molded
by the spirit’s qualities, which impress it with a certain
character that is mainly visible in the face. For this
reason, the eyes have been rightly described as the mirror
of the soul, which means that the face most particularly
reflects the soul. Thus, it may be that individuals who
are extremely unattractive physically can nevertheless
project something pleasant if they are good, mindful
and humane spirits. On the other hand, there are very
attractive faces that awaken nothing in you – you might
even find them repulsive. How can you believe that only
perfect bodies house high order spirits, when every day
you encounter moral individuals with deformed bodies?
Although there may be no pronounced physical likeness,
a similarity of tastes and tendencies can still pass on what
we call an air of familiarity.”

The body that clothes a soul in a new incarnation does not necessarily
have any relation to the previous one, since it can proceed from
a very different origin. It would therefore be absurd to conclude

that a succession of lives is connected by a likeness that is strictly
fortuitous. Nevertheless, a spirit’s qualities almost always modify
the organs that serve for its manifestation, impressing a distinctive
stamp on the face, and even on the general manner. Thus, inside
the humblest envelope one might find expressions of greatness and
nobility of spirit, while under the garment of a wealthy person one
can often find vulgarity and dishonor. Some persons, who have risen
from the lowest positions, acquire the habits and manners of high
society with hardly any effort – they seem to have returned to their
rightful element. But others, in spite of their birth and education,
always feel out of place there. How can this fact be explained except
as a reflection of what the spirit was in former lives?