Mental Impairment. Insanity

Question 371:
Is there any basis for the opinion that mentally impaired
individuals have a soul of a little-evolved nature?

“No. They have a human soul who is frequently more
intelligent than you might think, and who suffers immensely
from the insufficiency of its means to communicate – as a
mute suffers from the inability to speak.”

Question 372:
What is the aim of Providence in creating unfortunate beings
like the mentally impaired?

Answer:
“The spirits who dwell in such bodies are expiating past
wrongs. They suffer from their constraints and from
the impossibility of expressing themselves because of
undeveloped or defective brains.”

– Then is it inaccurate to say that organs do not exercise any
influence on the faculties?

“We have never said that organs have no influence at
all; rather, they exercise a very great influence on the
manifestation of the faculties, but they themselves do
not produce the faculties – that is the difference. A good
musician will not make good music with a bad instrument,
but that does not mean he or she is not a good musician.”

It is necessary to distinguish between the normal state and the
pathological state. In the normal state, mental ability may overcome
material obstacles. However, there are cases where matter offers so
much resistance that the manifestations are hindered or distorted,
as is the case with mental impairment and insanity. These are
pathological cases, and in such states the soul is not in possession
of its full reasoning ability, which is why human law exempts such
persons from responsibility for their acts.

Question 373:
What could possibly be the merit in the existence of beings
who, like the mentally impaired, can do neither good nor evil,
and therefore cannot progress?

Answer:
“It is an expiation imposed for their having abused certain
faculties in a former life; it is a temporary pause.”

– So the body of a mentally impaired person may confine
a spirit who perhaps animated the body of a genius in a
preceding existence?

“Yes, genius sometimes becomes a curse when it is abused.”

Moral superiority does not always imply intellectual superiority,
and the greatest geniuses may have much to expiate. Consequently,
they often live a present existence that is inferior when compared
to those they have already lived – a cause of great suffering. The
impediments that these spirits experience when they try to express
themselves are for them like chains that fetter the movements of
an active person. One could say that the mentally impaired are
disabled in the brain, as others are disabled in their limbs or eyes.

Question 374:
In the spirit state, are the mentally impaired conscious of their
mental state?

Answer:
“Yes, quite often. They understand that the chains
hindering their development are a trial and an expiation.”

Question 375:
What is the situation of the spirit in the state of insanity?

Answer:
“When freed from the body, the spirit receives impressions
directly, and directly exerts its action upon matter. Once
incarnated, however, it finds itself in completely different
conditions and in need of acting with the help of special
organs. If one part or a group of these organs is altered, the
spirit’s actions are interrupted – defective eyes cause blindness;
defective ears cause deafness, etc. Now imagine that the
organ presiding over the manifestations of intelligence and
will is partially or entirely damaged or modified and you
will easily understand that the use of such an incomplete
or distorted organ will result in an affliction that the spirit
is fully aware of, but whose course it is powerless to deter.”

– Then it is always the body and not the spirit that is
dysfunctional?

“Yes, but you must not lose sight of the fact that just as a
spirit acts upon matter, matter reacts upon the spirit to a
certain degree; hence, a spirit may find itself momentarily
controlled by the alteration of its organs through which it
manifests and receives various impressions. It may happen
that, with time, and after the insanity has lasted quite a
while, the repetition of the same acts end up exerting on
the spirit an influence from which it will not be freed until
its complete separation from every material effect.”

Question 376:
What is the reason for insanity sometimes leading to suicide?

Answer:
“The spirit suffers immensely from its constraints and
from the powerlessness to freely manifest itself. Thus, it
seeks a way to break its ties in death.”

Question 377:
After death, does the spirit of a mentally impaired person
continue to feel the derangement of its faculties?

Answer:
“It may feel it for quite some time until it is completely
disconnected from matter, like a person who, upon
awakening, continues to feel the confusion into which
sleep has immersed him or her.”

Question 378:
How is it possible for the impairment of the brain to react
upon the spirit after death?

Answer:
“It is a remembrance. A weight bears down upon the
spirit, and since it was not aware of everything that took
place during its insanity, it requires some time to be able
to understand its current state. That is why the longer
insanity lasts during life, the longer the affliction and
the constraint will last after death. Disconnected from
the body, the spirit continues to feel the impression of its
bonds for some time thereafter.”