The Nature of Future Joys and Sorrows

Question 965:
Is there anything material about the joys and sorrows of the
soul after death?

Answer:
“They cannot be material since the soul is not matter.
Common sense says so. There is nothing carnal about future
joys and sorrows, and that is why they are a thousand times
more vivid than those experienced on earth. Once disengaged
from matter, the spirit is more impressionable; matter no
longer weakens its sensitivity.” (See nos. 237-257)

Question 966:
Why do human beings have such crude and absurd ideas
about the joys and sorrows of the future life?

Answer:
“Because their intelligence is not yet sufficiently developed.
Does the child comprehend in the same way as the adult?
Besides, it also depends on how they have been taught – that
is the point at which there is the most need for reform.

“Your language is too incomplete to express what exists
beyond your reach. Thus, it has been necessary to make
comparisons, and you have taken such images and
figures as reality itself. However, as people become more
enlightened, they better comprehend the things that their
language cannot express.”

Question 967:
What does the happiness of good spirits consist of?

Answer:
“In knowing all things; in feeling no hatred, jealousy,
envy, ambition or any of the passions that make people
unhappy. The love that unites them is a source of supreme
happiness. They do not experience the needs, sufferings
or anxieties of material life. They are happy with the good
they do. Moreover, the happiness of spirits is always in
proportion to their progress. Actually, only the pure
spirits enjoy supreme happiness; however, this does not
mean the others are unhappy. Between the evil ones and
the perfected ones, there is an infinity of gradations, in
which enjoyments are proportioned to their moral state.
Those who are already sufficiently advanced understand
the happiness of those who have reached that state before
them and they aspire to it, but for them it is a reason for
emulation and not jealousy. They know that it depends on
their own efforts to reach it and they labor toward that end
with the calmness of a pure conscience. They are happy at
no longer having to suffer what is endured by evil spirits.”

Question 968:
You place the absence of material needs among the conditions
of happiness for spirits. But isn’t the satisfaction of those needs
a source of enjoyment for humans?

Answer:
“Yes, the gratification of their animal passions. When they
cannot satisfy those needs, it is torture.”

Question 969:
What are we to understand when it is said that pure spirits
are gathered in the bosom of God and employed in singing
praises to God?

Answer:
“It is an allegory to give you an idea of the knowledge
they possess about the perfections of God because they see
and comprehend God. Like all other allegories, however,
you must not take it literally. Everything in nature sings,
from the grain of sand on up, proclaiming the power, the
wisdom, and the goodness of God. But you must not
suppose that the blessed spirits are absorbed in eternal
contemplation. That would be a monotonous and dull
happiness, and furthermore, a selfish one because their
existence would be an unending uselessness. They no
longer suffer the tribulations of corporeal life, which in
itself is already an enjoyment. Later, as we have told you,
they know and comprehend all things, and they make
use of the intelligence they have acquired by aiding the
progress of other spirits. That is their occupation, and at
the same time, it is their enjoyment.”

Question 970:
What do the sufferings of low order spirits consist of?

Answer:
“They are as varied as the causes that produce them and
are in proportion to their degree of impurity, in the same
way that enjoyments are in proportion to their degree of
purity. We can thus sum them up: coveting everything they
lack to be happy but not being able to obtain it; seeing
happiness but being unable to attain it; regret, jealousy,
rage and despair arising from everything that keeps them
from being happy; remorse and an indescribable mental
anguish. They long for all sorts of enjoyments but cannot
satisfy them. That is what tortures them.”

Question 971:
Is the influence exerted by spirits over one another always good?

Answer:
“It is always good on the part of good spirits, of course.
However, perverse spirits endeavor to draw aside from the
path of repentance and the good those whom they think
are susceptible of being misled, and whom they often led
into evil during their earthly lives.”

– So death does not deliver us from temptation?

“No, but the action of evil spirits is much less significant over
other spirits than over human beings because other spirits are
no longer sustained by material passions.” (See no. 996)

Question 972:
In what way do evil spirits tempt other spirits since they
cannot count on the passions to help them?

Answer:
“Although the passions no longer exist in the material
sense, they still exist mentally in little-evolved spirits.
They lure their victims to places where they can witness
the spectacle of those passions and everything that
arouses them.”

– But what end do those passions serve since they no longer
have any real object?

“That is precisely what comprises their torture: misers see
gold that they cannot possess; debauchees see orgies that
they cannot take part in; the haughty see the honors that
they envy, but which they cannot enjoy.”

Question 973:
What are the greatest sufferings evil spirits have to endure?

Answer:
“It is utterly impossible to describe the mental tortures
that are the punishment for some crimes. The actual
spirits who suffer them find it difficult to give you an idea
of them, but assuredly, the most frightful is the thought of
being condemned forever.”

People’s idea about the joys and sorrows of the soul after death
is more accurate or less according to their state of intelligence.
As they become more evolved, their thinking also becomes more
refined and more divested of materiality. They comprehend things
more rationally and they cease to take the images of figurative
language literally. The most enlightened reasoning teaches us that
the soul is an entirely spiritual being and that it cannot be affected
by impressions that act only upon matter. However, it does not
follow that it is free of suffering or that it is not punished for its
wrongdoing. (See no. 237)

Spirit communications are meant to show us the future state of the
soul, no longer as a matter of theory, but as a reality. They place before
us all the vicissitudes of life beyond the grave, but at the same time
they also show us that they are the perfectly logical consequences of
the terrestrial life. Although divested of the fantastic accoutrements
created by the human imagination, they are nonetheless painful for
those who have made a bad use of their faculties. The diversity of
such consequences is infinite, but may be generally summed up in
the fact that each soul is punished for its specific sins. Some are
punished by the incessant sight of the evil they committed; others,
by regret, fear, shame, doubt, loneliness, darkness and separation
from those who are dear to them, etc.

Question 974:
Where does the doctrine of eternal fire come from?

Answer:
“An image taken as reality – like so many others.”

– But couldn’t this fear lead to a good result?

“See for yourself whether or not it even restrains those who
teach it. If you teach things that reason will later reject,
you produce an impression that will be neither durable
nor healthy.”

Incapable of translating the nature of those sufferings into their
own language, humans have not found a more forceful comparison
for such sufferings than fire, which represents the cruelest torture
possible and is the symbol of the most potent action. It is for
this reason that the belief in eternal fire may be traced back to
earliest antiquity, and modern cultures have inherited it from their
ancestors. Furthermore, it is for this reason that in their figurative
language they speak of fiery passions, burning with love, burning
with jealousy, etc.

Question 975:
Do low order spirits comprehend the happiness of the morally
upright?

Answer:
“Yes, and that is what tortures them, for they understand
that they are deprived of it due to their own fault. That is
why the spirit, freed from matter, aspires to a new corporeal
existence. It knows that each existence, if well employed,
will shorten the duration of that torment. With that in
mind, it chooses the trials that will expiate its wrongs. You
must remember that the spirit suffers for all the wrong it
has done or which it has intentionally caused, for all the
good that it might have done but didn’t, and for all the evil
that resulted from the good it failed to do.

“The discarnate spirit is no longer enveloped by the veil of
matter. It is as though it has emerged from a fog and sees what
is keeping it from happiness. Hence, it suffers even more
because it understands the extent of its guilt. For the spirit,
illusion no longer exists; it sees things as they really are.”

Spirits in the errant state, on the one hand, take in all their
past existences at a glance; on the other, they foresee the
promised future and comprehend what they lack to reach
it. Like a hiker who has reached the top of a hill, they see
both the course that they have already traveled and how
far they must yet travel to reach their destination.

Question 976:
Is the sight of suffering spirits a cause of affliction for the good
ones, and if so, does it disturb their happiness?

Answer:
“It is not an affliction, because they know that such evil
will end, and they help the others in their betterment by
lending them a helping hand. That is their occupation and
a joy when they succeed.”

– This is understandable for spirits who are unknown or
indifferent to them, but doesn’t the sight of the sorrows and
sufferings of those who were dear to them on earth disturb
their happiness?

“If they did not see your sufferings, it would mean they
are estranged from you after death. Religion tells you
that souls continue to see you but that they regard your
afflictions from another point of view – they know that
your sufferings will aid your advancement if you bear them
with resignation. Such spirits are more afflicted by the lack
of courage that holds you back than by the sufferings they
know are only temporary.”

Question 977:
Since spirits cannot hide their thoughts from one another, and
since all the acts of their lives are known, does it follow that those
who are guilty continually see their victims as being present?

Answer:
“Common sense tells you that it cannot be otherwise.”

– Is this revealing of all its reprehensible acts and the perpetual
sight of its victims a punishment for the guilty spirit?

“More than you might think, but it only lasts until it
has expiated its wrong-doing either as a spirit or as an
individual in new corporeal existences.”

When we find ourselves in the world of spirits, our entire past
will be uncovered; the good and the evil we have done will also be
known. Those who have done evil will try in vain to avoid the sight
of their victims and their inevitable presence will be an incessant
punishment and regret for them until they have expiated their
wrongs. Moral individuals, on the contrary, will only encounter
friendly and benevolent eyes everywhere.

For evil persons, there is no greater torment on earth than the
presence of their victims and that is why they always avoid them.
What will become of them when, divested of the illusion of the
passions, they comprehend the evil they have done, see their most
secret actions revealed, find their hypocrisy unmasked, and perceive
that they cannot hide from their victim’s sight? To the same extent
that the soul of the wicked feels shame, regret, and remorse, that of
the righteous enjoys perfect peace.

Question 978:
Doesn’t the memory of the wrongs committed by a soul while still
imperfect disturb its happiness even after it has purified itself?

Answer:
“No, because it has atoned for its wrongs and has come
forth victorious from the trials to which it had submitted
itself for that very purpose.”

Question 979:
Aren’t the trials it still must undergo in order to complete its
purification a heavy concern that disturbs its happiness?

Answer:
“In the case of the soul that still remains tainted, yes. That
is why it cannot enjoy perfect happiness until it is entirely
pure. Nonetheless, for the soul who has already progressed,
the thought of the trials it still must undergo has nothing
painful about it.”

A soul who has reached a certain degree of purity enjoys happiness.
A feeling of sweet satisfaction surrounds it and it feels happy with
everything it sees and all that surrounds it. The veil has been lifted,
uncovering the marvels and mysteries of creation, and divine
perfections appear in all their splendor.

Question 980:
Is the link of affinity that unites spirits of the same order a
source of happiness for them?

Answer:
“The unity of spirits who are attuned to one another
through the good is one of their greatest joys because they do
not have to fear seeing that unity disturbed by selfishness.
On entirely spiritual worlds, they form families animated
by the same sentiment, and from that they derive their
spiritual happiness  – the same as on your world when
you group yourselves into categories and enjoy a certain
pleasure when you get together. The pure and sincere
affection they feel, and of which they are the object, is
a source of happiness. There are neither false friends nor
hypocrites among them.”

Humans enjoy the first-fruits of this happiness on the earth when
they meet souls with whom they can enter into a pure and holy
unity. In a life of greater purity, such pleasure will be beyond words
and unlimited because they will only meet sympathetic souls whom
selfishness has not made indifferent. In nature everything is love;
selfishness is what destroys it.

Question 981:
Regarding the future state of the spirit, is there any difference
between those who have feared death and those who have
looked upon it with indifference or even with joy?

Answer:
“The difference can be very great, although this is
usually obliterated by the causes that produce such fear
or desire. Those who fear death or those who desire
it may be moved by very different sentiments, and it
is these sentiments that will influence a spirit’s future
state. For instance, it is obvious that those who desire
death only because it will put an end to their troubles
are, in reality, complaining against Providence and
against the trials they must endure.”

Question 982:
Is it necessary to make a profession of faith in Spiritism and to
believe in the manifestations in order to ensure our well-being
in the next life?

Answer:
“If that were so, then all those who do not believe in them,
or who have not had the opportunity of learning anything
about them, would be disinherited, which is absurd. Only
the good ensures one’s future well-being. The good is
always the good, whatever the path that leads to it.” (See
nos. 165-799)

Belief in Spiritism aids our self-improvement by ensuring our
ideas regarding certain points about the future; it hastens the
advancement of individuals and the masses because it enables us to
ascertain what we will be someday, making it a support and a light
to guide us. Spiritism teaches us to bear our trials with patience and
resignation, and turns us away from doing things that might delay
our future happiness. Through its teachings, Spiritism contributes
to our future joys, but it has never stated that we may not attain to
that happiness without it.