Temporary Punishments

Question 983:
Since a spirit who expiates its wrongs in a new life undergoes
physical suffering, is it correct to say that after death the soul
experiences only mental suffering?

Answer:
“It is very true that the tribulations of life represent a
suffering for the reincarnated soul, but it is only the body
that undergoes physical suffering.

“You usually say that a dead person no longer suffers, but
this is not always true. As a spirit it no longer suffers physical
pain, but depending on the wrongs it has committed,
it may have mental sufferings still more severe, and in
a new existence it may be even unhappier. Those who
have wasted their wealth will in turn beg and suffer the
privations of poverty; the proud will undergo humiliations
of every kind; those who have abused authority and have
treated their subordinates with disdain and harshness will
be forced to obey masters who are even harsher. All the
punishments and tribulations of life are expiations for
wrongs of another life when they are not the consequence
of wrongs committed in the present one. When you have
departed your present life, you will understand this better.
(See nos. 273, 393, 399)

“Those who believe themselves to be happy on earth
because they can satisfy their passions are those who make
the least effort at self-improvement. Frequently, they begin
to expiate such ephemeral happiness in this life but they
will certainly atone for it in another existence as material
as this one.”

Question 984:
Are the troubles of life always punishment for current wrongs?

Answer:
“No. We have already told you that they are trials imposed
by God or chosen by you yourselves in the spirit state
before your reincarnation in order to expiate the wrongs
committed in a former life. No infraction of the laws of
God, and especially of the law of justice, ever remains
unpunished, and if punishment is not experienced in this
life, it certainly will be in another. This is why persons
whom you regard as morally upright frequently still feel
the consequences of their actions from past existences.”
(See no. 393)

Question 985:
Is the reincarnation of a soul on a less dense world a reward?

Answer:
“It is a consequence of its purification, for as spirits
become purified, they reincarnate on successively better
worlds to the point where they completely rid themselves
of all matter and moral imperfections in order to eternally
enjoy the bliss of pure spirits in the bosom of God.”

On worlds in which existence is less material than on this one,
the needs are less dense and all physical suffering is less acute. The
inhabitants no longer know the evil passions that on less evolved
worlds make them each other’s enemies. Having no motives for
hatred or jealousy, they live in peace, practicing the law of justice,
love and charity. They do not know the worries and anguish that
are born from envy, pride and selfishness, and which comprise the
torment of our terrestrial existence. (See nos. 172, 182)

Question 986:
Can spirits who have progressed during their terrestrial
existence sometimes reincarnate on the same world?

Answer:
“Yes, if they have not been able to accomplish their mission
and if they ask to complete it in a new existence; however, in
that case, it is no longer an expiation for them.” (See no.173)

Question 987:
What becomes of those who, without doing evil, nevertheless
do nothing to shake off the influence of matter?

Answer:
“Since they have made no progress towards perfection,
they must begin a new existence similar to the one they
have left behind. They remain at a standstill, and thus can
prolong the suffering of their expiation.”

Question 988:
There are persons whose lives flow in perfect serenity, and
having no worries, they are entirely free of concerns. Is their
happy existence evidence that they have nothing to expiate
from any former existence?

Answer:
“Do you know many like that? If you think you do, you are
mistaken. Usually, such serenity is no more than apparent.

They could have chosen such an existence, but when they
leave it behind they perceive that it has not helped them to
progress. Then, like those who have been idle, they regret
the time they wasted. Bear in mind that spirits cannot
acquire knowledge and evolve except through activity.
If they choose to rest in a worry-free existence, they do
not advance. They are like those who, according to your
customs, need to work but go for a walk instead, or go to
sleep in order to avoid it. Also bear in mind that each of you
will have to answer for any intentional inactivity during your
life, and that such uselessness is always fatal to your future
happiness. The sum of future happiness is always exactly in
proportion to the sum of the good you have done. In the
same way, your unhappiness is always in proportion to the
sum of the evil you have done, and to the number of those
whom you have made unhappy.”

Question 989:
There are persons who, although not positively wicked, make
everyone around them unhappy because of their character.
What is the consequence of this for them?

Answer:
“Such persons are assuredly not good. They will expiate
this wrong by the sight of those whom they have made
unhappy, and this will comprise a constant reproach for
them. Then, in another existence, they will endure all that
they have caused others to endure.”