The Duration of Future Punishments

Question 1003:
Is the duration of the sufferings of the guilty in the future life
arbitrary or subordinate to some law?

Answer:
“God never acts capriciously and everything in the
universe is ruled by laws that reveal the divine wisdom
and goodness.”

Question 1004:
What determines the duration of the sufferings of the guilty?

Answer:
“The length of time required for their improvement.
Since the state of suffering or happiness is in proportion
to a spirit’s degree of purification, the duration and
nature of its sufferings depend on the time it takes to
improve itself. As the spirit progresses and its sentiments
become purer, its sufferings diminish and are changed
to the same extent.”

St. Louis

Question 1005:
Does time for a suffering spirit seem longer or shorter than
when it was incarnate?

Answer:
“It seems longer because sleep does not exist. It is only for
spirits who have reached a certain degree of purification
that time is effaced, so to speak, in the face of the infinite.”
(See no. 240)

Question 1006:
Can the duration of a spirit’s suffering be eternal?

Answer:
“Of course, if it were to remain eternally evil; that is to say, if
it were never to repent or improve itself, it would then suffer
eternally. However, God has not created beings eternally
devoted to evil. They were only created simple and ignorant,
and all of them must progress over a longer or shorter period
of time according to their own free will. This will can be
belated to various degrees, just as there are children who are
precocious to various degrees. Sooner or later, however, it
will manifest itself by the irresistible need the spirit feels to
leave its state of imperfection and to be happy. The law that
governs the duration of suffering is therefore eminently wise
and beneficent. It subordinates that duration to the spirit’s
own efforts, never depriving it of its free will. If it makes a bad
use of it, it will have to bear the consequences.”

St. Louis

Question 1007:
Are there spirits who never repent?

Answer:
“There are spirits who put off their repentance, but
supposing that they will never improve would be to deny
the law of progress and to assert that the child will never
become an adult.”

St. Louis

Question 1008:
Does the duration of punishments always depend on the
spirit’s own will or are there punishments that are imposed on
it for a specific length of time?

“There are punishments that can be imposed on it for a
specific length of time, but God, who wills only the good
for God’s creatures, always welcomes its repentance. The
spirit’s desire to improve is never fruitless.”

St. Louis

Question 1009:
Accordingly, the punishments imposed are never eternal?

Answer:
“Consult your own common sense and reason, and ask
yourselves whether an eternal condemnation for a few moments
of error would not be a negation of God’s goodness. In fact,
what is the duration of a life, even if it were to last a hundred
years, in comparison to eternity? Eternity! Can you understand
that word? Suffering and torture without end and without
hope for only a few wrongs! Doesn’t your reason reject such
an idea? That the ancients saw in the Master of the Universe a
terrible, jealous and vindictive God is understandable. In their
ignorance, they attributed the human passions to the deity, but
that is not the God of the Christians, who extols love, charity,
mercy and the forgetfulness of offenses as the highest virtues.
Wouldn’t God have the qualities that God demands as a duty?
Isn’t there a contradiction in attributing to God both infinite
goodness and infinite vengeance? You say that above all God
is just and that humans do not understand the divine justice.
Justice, however, does not exclude kindness, and God would
not be kind in condemning most creatures to a horrible and
everlasting punishment. Could God make justice obligatory
for everyone if they were not given the means to comprehend
it? Besides, isn’t justice sublime when, allied with goodness, it
makes the duration of punishment depend on the efforts of the
guilty to improve themselves? Therein you will find the truth
of the precept ‘to each according to his deeds.’”

St. Augustine

“Through all the means within your reach, strive to
combat and to eradicate the idea of eternal punishment,
a blasphemous notion against the justice and goodness
of God and the most abundant source of the incredulity,
materialism, and indifference that have pervaded the
masses from the time their intelligence began to develop.
The spirit who has just left the state of ignorance or is
about to become enlightened quickly comprehends this
monstrous injustice. Its reason rejects it, and then more
often than not, the spirit equates the eternal punishment
that it rejects with the God to whom it attributes this
condemnation. From this arise the innumerable ills that
have fallen upon you, and whose remedy we have come
to bring you. The task we have pointed out will be much
easier to accomplish, since the authorities from whom
the defenders of this belief have sought support have
avoided a formal pronouncement on this regard. Neither
the Councils nor the Church Fathers tackled this serious
question. Following the Evangelists themselves and taking
Christ’s allegorical words literally, if Christ did in fact
threaten the guilty with unquenchable, eternal fire, there
is absolutely nothing in Christ’s words that proves they are
condemned for all eternity.

“Poor lost sheep, learn to behold the Good Shepherd, who
approaches you and who, far from wanting to banish you
forever from his presence, comes to find you in order to
lead you back to the fold. Prodigal children, leave your
willful exile. Turn your path toward the Father, who opens
his arms to you and who is always ready to celebrate your
return to his family.”

Lamennais

“Wars of words! Wars of words! Haven’t you shed enough
blood? Are the inquisitional fires to be rekindled once
again? You argue over expressions such as ‘eternal suffering’
and ‘eternal punishment’. Don’t you know that what you
understand today by eternity was not understood in the same
way by the ancients? Let theologians consult the sources and
like you they will discover that the Hebrew text does not
give the word the same meaning that the Greek, the Latin,
and modern translations have rendered as everlasting and
unpardonable punishment. The ‘eternity’ of the punishment
corresponds to the evil that has occurred. Yes, so long as
evil exists among humans, punishments will continue.
It is in this relative sense that the sacred texts should be
interpreted. Eternal punishment is therefore relative and
not absolute. A day will come when all humans will don
the garments of innocence through repentance, and on that
day there will be no more groaning or gnashing of teeth.
It is true that your intelligence is limited, but even at this
stage it is still a gift from God, and with the help of reason
there will not be one single human of good faith who could
possibly understand eternal punishment in any different
way. Eternal punishment! How could that be? Only if we
believed that evil was also eternal! But only God is eternal
and God could not have created eternal evil. If such were
the case, we would have to deny one of the most beautiful
divine attributes: supreme power, for God would cease
to be supremely powerful the moment God introduced a
destructive element into creation. Humanity! Humanity!
No longer immerse your somber glance in the depths of the
earth, searching for these punishments. Weep, hope, expiate
and take comfort in the thought of a God who is infinitely
good, absolutely powerful and essentially just.”

Plato

“The objective of humankind is to gravitate toward divine
unity. For divine unity to occur, three things are necessary:
justice, love and knowledge. There are three things that
are contrary to and oppose this unity: ignorance, hatred
and injustice. I must tell you that you lie about these
fundamental principles when you compromise the idea
of God by exaggerating God’s severity. Furthermore, you
doubly compromise it when you allow the spirit of the
creature to think that the creature itself possesses more
clemency, gentleness, love, and true justice than you
attribute to the Infinite Being. You destroy the very idea
of hell by rendering it as ridiculous and unacceptable
to your minds as the horrendous spectacle of the
executions, the burnings at the stake and the tortures of
the Middle Ages is to your hearts! How can the idea of
hell be sustained at a time when blind reprisals have been
banished from human laws? Believe me, brothers and
sisters in God and in Jesus Christ; believe me and either
resign yourselves to letting all the dogmas you hold to be
unalterable perish in your hands, or breathe new life into
them by opening them up to the benevolent explanations
good spirits are now giving concerning them. The idea
of a hell with its glowing furnaces and boiling cauldrons
might be tolerated or admissible in a mythological age.
In the nineteenth century, however, it is nothing more
than an empty phantom that only serves to frighten little
children, who will no longer believe in it once they have
grown up. If you persist in such a frightening mythology,
you will engender disbelief, the origin of every sort of
social upheaval. I tremble at the idea of an entire social
order shaken and crumbling upon its very foundations
for lack of a penal sanction. People of ardent and living
faith, vanguards of the day of the light, let us join efforts,
not to maintain old fables that are now discredited, but
to revitalize the true penal sanction under forms that
correspond to your customs, your sentiments and the
enlightenment of your era.

“Who in fact are the guilty? Those who through a
transgression, through a wrong impulse of the soul have
distanced themselves from the objective of their creation,
which consists in the desire for goodness and beauty as
idealized by the human embodiment of perfection, the
divine model: Jesus Christ.

“What is punishment? It is the natural consequence of that
wrong impulse, the amount of pain necessary for the guilty
through the trials of suffering due to their transgression.
Punishment is the goad that arouses the soul through its
affliction to turn toward itself, to return to the path of
salvation. The objective of punishment is none other than
rehabilitation and redemption. Wanting punishment to
be eternal for a wrong which is not eternal is to deprive it
of its reason to exist.

“Truly I say to you, stop comparing eternity in terms of
the good, which is the essence of the Creator, with evil,
which is the essence of the creature – an approach that
ends up creating unjustifiable penalties. Rather, affirm the
gradual diminution of punishments and penalties through
successive reincarnations and you will consecrate divine
unity through reason and sentiment.”

Paul, The Apostle

Humans are stimulated to morality and turned from evil by the
lure of reward and the fear of punishment, but if such punishment
is represented in a way that defies reason, it will yield no influence.

Rather, it will be rejected in its totality – form and foundation.
However, if the future is presented under a logical form, it will not
be rejected. Spiritism provides such an explanation.

The doctrine of eternal punishment in its absolute sense makes the
Supreme Being an implacable God. Would it be logical to say that a
king is very good, very benevolent and very indulgent, that he only
wants the happiness of all around him, but that he is at the same
time jealous, vindictive, inflexibly severe and that he punishes threequarters of his subjects with the maximum penalty for any offense
or infraction of his laws, even when they have broken them without
having been aware of them? Wouldn’t that be a contradiction? How
could God be less than what a human would be?

Another contradiction is presented in this case. Since God knows
everything, then God knew while creating a soul that it would fail,
that from its formation it was destined to eternal unhappiness. Is
this possible? Is it rational? With the doctrine of relative punishment
everything is set aright. God undoubtedly knew that the soul would
fail, but gave it the means of enlightening itself through its own
experience and through its own errors. It would have to expiate
such errors in order to establish itself in the good, but the door
of hope would never be closed against it. God made the moment
of its liberation depend on the efforts it makes to attain it. This is
something that all can understand and the most meticulous logic
can accept. If future punishment had been presented in this way,
there would be a lot fewer skeptics.

The word eternal is almost always employed figuratively in common
language to designate something of a long period of duration, of
which the end is not foreseen, although it is very well known that
there will in fact be an end. We speak of the eternal snows of the
high mountains and the poles, for instance, although we know,
on the one hand, that the physical world could come to an end,
and on the other hand, that the state of those regions could be
modified by a shift in the earth’s axis or some other cataclysm. The
word eternal, in this case, does not mean infinite duration. When
we suffer some long-term illness we say that it is eternal. So why
wonder when spirits who have suffered for many years, centuries,
and even thousands of years speak of it as being eternal? Above all,
we must not forget that their imperfection does not allow them to
see the end of their afflictions; they believe they will suffer forever,
which is in itself a punishment for them.

Furthermore, the doctrine of physical fire, of furnaces, and tortures
borrowed from the Tartarus60 of paganism has been completely
abandoned nowadays by liberal theology. Only in certain schools
are such terrifying allegorical images still presented as literal truths
by some individuals who are more fanatical than enlightened. This
is all very wrong, because young imaginations, once past the terror,
will most likely become skeptical. Today, theology recognizes that
the word fire is employed figuratively and should be understood as
mental suffering (see no.974). Those who, like us, have followed
the incidents of the life and sufferings beyond the grave through
Spiritist communications have been convinced that though not
physical, they are no less poignant. Even regarding their duration,
some theologians are beginning to accept the restrictive meaning
indicated above, and in fact, they think that the word eternal could
refer to the penalties per se, as the consequence of an immutable
law, and not to its application to each individual. On the day when
religion accepts such an interpretation, as well as others that are also
the consequence of the progress of enlightenment, it will bring back
many lost sheep into its fold.