Antipathetic Unions

Question 939:
Since sympathetic spirits are led to meet one another, why is
it that among incarnate spirits affection is frequently only one­-sided, and sincere love is received with indifference or even
repulsion? Moreover, can’t the liveliest affection between two
persons turn into dislike and sometimes hatred?

Answer:
“Can’t you understand that this may be a punishment,
albeit a passing one? Besides, how many are there who
think they are deeply in love because they only judge
physical appearance, but when obliged to live together
they soon realize their judgment had only been based
on physical passion? It is not enough to be enamored
with someone who pleases you, and whom you suppose
to be endowed with beautiful qualities; it is only by
living together that you can appreciate each other. On
the other hand, how many unions there are that at first
seem to be incompatible, but which, in time, as both get
to know each other better, are transformed into a tender
and lasting love because it is founded on mutual esteem!
You must not forget that it is the spirit who loves and not
the body, and that once the physical illusion dissipates
the spirit sees reality.

“There are two kinds of affection: that of the body and
that of the soul, and these are often mistaken for each
other. When pure and sympathetic, the affection of the
soul is lasting; the affection of the body is perishable. That
is why those who believed they loved each other with an
eternal love often end up detesting each other when the
illusion has vanished.”

Question 940:
Isn’t the lack of sympathy between persons destined to live
together also a source of suffering that is all the more bitter
because it poisons their entire existence?

Answer:
“Very bitter, in fact. However, it is usually one of those
misfortunes of which you yourselves are the main cause.
In the first place, simply because your laws are at fault do
you believe that God obliges you to live with those you
dislike? Moreover, in such unions you almost always seek
more to satisfy your pride and ambition rather than to
enjoy the happiness of mutual affection. Thus, you suffer
the natural consequence of your prejudices.”

– But in such cases isn’t there almost always an innocent victim?

“Yes, and for that one it is a heavy expiation; however, the
responsibility for such unhappiness will fall upon the one
who has caused it. If the light of truth has reached the soul
of the victim, faith in the future will provide consolation.
Besides, to the degree that such prejudices are weakened,
the causes of these private misfortunes will disappear.”