A Theoretical Summary on the Driving Force behind Human Actions

Question 872:
The issue of free will may be summed up as follows: humans
are not fatally led into evil; their acts are not “written”
beforehand; the crimes they commit are not the result of
any decree of destiny. As a trial and an expiation, they can
choose an existence in which they will feel induced to crime,
whether through the surroundings in which they are placed,
or whether through the circumstances that supervene; but
they will always be free to act as they wish. Free will exists
in the spirit state in the choice of trials, and in the corporeal
life in the ability of yielding to or resisting the temptations
to which they have voluntarily submitted themselves. It is
the duty of education to combat evil tendencies and it will
effectively do so when it is based on an in-depth study of
the human moral nature. Through the knowledge of the laws
that govern this moral nature, humans will manage to modify
it, as intelligence is modified through education, and physical
constitution through bodily care.

When disconnected from matter and in the errant state,
the spirit makes the choice of its future corporeal existence
according to the degree of perfection it has reached. It is in
this, as we have stated, that its free will especially consists. This
freedom is not annulled by incarnation. If the spirit yields to
the influence of matter, it fails in the trials it has chosen for
itself. In order to help overcome them, however, it can invoke
the assistance of God and good spirits. (See no. 337)

Without free will, humans would be neither guilty in evil
nor meritorious in goodness. This is so true that in the world
censure or praise always depends on intent, that is, on the will
of individuals. Those who say will actually mean freedom.
Therefore, people could not seek excuses in their physical
makeup for their wrongs without abdicating reason and the
human condition itself, and without equating themselves
with the brute. If this can be applied to evil, it applies to the
good as well. But whenever people practice the good, they take
great care to attribute the merit to their favor. They do not
attribute it to their organs, a fact which, notwithstanding the
opinion of a few theoreticians, proves that they instinctively
do not renounce the most glorious privilege of their species:
freedom of thought.

Fatalism, as commonly understood, implies a prior and
irrevocable ordaining of all the events of life, whatever their
importance may be. If that were the order of things, human
beings would be like machines deprived of will. Of what use
would their intelligence be if they were invariably overruled
in all their actions by the force of destiny? Such a doctrine, if
true, would represent the destruction of all human freedom.
Individuals would have no responsibility for their actions,
and as a result, there would be no evil, no crime, no virtue.
God, being supremely just, could not chastise God’s creatures
for wrongs that did not depend on them to start with, or
reward them for virtues for which they had no merit. Such
a law would be a further negation of the law of progress,
because people who would depend on fate for everything
would try to do nothing to improve their position since they
could make it neither better nor worse.

However, fatalism is not a meaningless word. It really does
apply in regard to the position of individuals on the earth
and the functions they perform on it as a consequence
of the kind of existence that their spirit had chosen as
a trial, an expiation or a mission. They fatally undergo
all the tribulations of that existence and all the good or
bad tendencies inherent to it. But at this point fatalism
ceases, for it depends on their will to yield or not to yield
to those tendencies. The details of events depend on the
circumstances that humans themselves create with their
deeds, and on those that spirits influence through the
thoughts they suggest to them. (See no. 459)

There is fatalism, therefore, in the events that are presented to
people as a consequence of the choice of existence made by
their spirit. However, there can be no fatalism in the results
of such events, because it may depend on them to modify the
course of things through their own prudence. Furthermore,
fatalism never applies to the acts of the moral life.

It is in death that people are subjected absolutely and
inexorably to the law of fatalism, for they cannot evade
the decree that has fixed the term of their existence or the
kind of death that must interrupt its course.

According to common belief, human beings derive all of
their instincts from themselves. These would proceed either
from their physical organization, for which they would not
be responsible, or from their own nature, in which they could
seek an excuse for themselves by saying that it is not their
fault for having been made like that. The Spiritist Doctrine
obviously looks at it from a moral standpoint by admitting
free will for humans in all its fullness. It tells them that if
they practice evil, or if they yield to an evil suggestion that
comes from outside themselves, they are still fully responsible
because the Doctrine recognizes their power to resist,
something obviously easier than to struggle against their own
nature. Thus, according to the Spiritist Doctrine there are no
irresistible temptations. People can always close their ears to
the secret voice that induces them to commit evil, just as they
can close them to the physical voice of someone who speaks
to them. They can do so through their will, asking God for
strength and pleading for the assistance of good spirits. This
is what Jesus teaches in the sublime plea of the Lord’s Prayer,
commanding us to say, “Do not let us fall into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.”

This theory of the driving force behind our acts obviously
stands out among all the teachings given by the Spirits. It is
not only sublime as to morality, but we will add that it also
elevates humans in their own eyes, leaving them free to shake
off the yoke of an obsessor, just as they are able to close their
door to intruders. Thus, they are no longer machines acting
on an impulse foreign to their own will, but instead they are
rational beings, who listen, judge and freely choose between
two counsels. Let us add that in spite of this, humans are not
deprived of initiative; they do not fail to act except on their
own impulse, because in reality they are still incarnate spirits
who preserve under the corporeal envelope the qualities and
defects they had as spirits. Therefore, the wrongs we commit
have their primary origin in the imperfections of our own
spirit, who has not yet reached the moral superiority to which
it is destined, but who nevertheless does not lack free will.
Corporeal life is given to it so that it may purge itself of its
imperfections through the trials it undergoes during life, and
it is precisely such imperfections that weaken it and render it
more accessible to the suggestions of other imperfect spirits,
who take advantage of the fact in order to make it succumb
in the struggle that it has undertaken. If the spirit emerges
victorious from this struggle, it evolves; if it fails, it remains as
it was – no worse, no better. It is a trial which it will have to
start over and which it may have to endure for a long time.
The more it purifies itself, the more it decreases its weaknesses
and the less accessible it becomes to those who tempt it to
evil. Its moral strength increases due to its progress and evil
spirits withdraw from it.

All spirits, who are more or less good when incarnate,
comprise the human species, and since earth is one of the
least advanced worlds, there are more evil spirits here than
good ones. That is why we see so much wickedness. So let
us make every effort not to have to return to this world
after our present sojourn and to deserve repose on a better
world, one of those privileged worlds, where goodness
reigns completely and where we will remember our stay
on this planet as merely a time of exile.
