Necessary Destruction and Abusive Destruction

Question 728:
Is destruction a law of nature?

Answer:
“It is necessary for everything to be destroyed in order to
be reborn and regenerated. What you call destruction is
no more than transformation that is aimed at renewing
and improving living beings.”

– Has the destruction instinct been given to living beings for
providential purposes?

“God’s creatures are the instruments that God uses for
attaining the divine ends. In order to feed themselves,
living beings destroy each other with the dual purpose of
maintaining the balance of reproduction – which might
otherwise become excessive – and utilizing the remains of
their external envelopes. But it is only the envelope that
is destroyed; the envelope is only an accessory and not an

essential part of the thinking being. The essential part is
the indestructible intelligent principle, which is developed
through the various metamorphoses that it undergoes.”

Question 729:
If destruction is necessary for the regeneration of beings, why
does nature surround them with the means of self­-preservation
and conservation?

Answer:
“To prevent their destruction before the proper time. Any
destruction that occurs too soon retards the development
of the intelligent principle. That is why God has given to
each being the need to stay alive and reproduce.”

Question 730:
Since death should lead us to a better life and deliver us from
the ills of this world, and should therefore be desired instead of
dreaded, why do humans have an instinctive horror of it and
see it as a cause for apprehension?

Answer:
“We have already stated that humans should seek to
prolong their life in order to accomplish their task. That
is why God has given them the self-preservation instinct:
it sustains them in all their trials. Without it they would
frequently give in to discouragement. The secret voice
that tells them to avoid death also tells them they may yet
do something more for their progress. Whenever danger
threatens them, it is a warning to them that they must
take advantage of the time God has granted them. But
ingrates usually give thanks to their lucky star instead of
their Creator.”

Question 731:
Why has nature placed the agents of destruction side by side
with the means of self-preservation?

Answer:
“The remedy beside the illness. We already have told
you: in order to maintain balance and to serve as a
counterweight.”

Question 732:
Is the need for destruction the same on all worlds?

Answer:
“It is in proportion to how material each particular world
is; it disappears altogether in a purer physical and moral
state. On worlds more evolved than yours, the conditions
of existence are altogether different.”

Question 733:
Will the need for destruction always exist for humankind on
the earth?

Answer:
“The need for destruction diminishes among humans to
the degree that their spirit overcomes matter. That is why
you may observe that the horror of destruction follows
upon intellectual and moral development.”

Question 734:
In their present state, do humans have an unlimited right of
destruction in regard to animals?

Answer:
“That right is limited to the need of providing for their
food and safety. Abuse has never been a right.”

Question 735:
What about destruction that exceeds the limits of need and
safety: hunting, for instance, when it has no other objective
than the pleasure of destroying needlessly?

Answer:
“It is a predominance of the animal nature over the
spiritual nature. All destruction that exceeds the limits of
need is a violation of God’s law. Animals only destroy to
satisfy their needs, but humans, who have free will, destroy
without need. They will be called to account for abusing
the freedom granted to them because in such cases they
yield to evil instincts.”

Question 736:
Do those cultures that carry their scrupulousness to excess
regarding the destruction of animals have any special merit?

Answer:
“Such excess is a sentiment that in itself is praiseworthy,
but it becomes abusive and its merit is neutralized by other
kinds of abuse. They act more out of superstitious fear
than true humaneness.”