The Choice of Trials

Question 258:
While in the errant state and before a new corporeal existence,
does a spirit have the awareness and foresight of what will
happen to it during its new lifetime?

Answer:
“The spirit itself chooses the kinds of trials it will undergo.
Its free will consists in doing so.”

– Then it is not God who imposes the tribulations of life on it
as a chastisement?

“Nothing happens without God’s permission, because
it was God who established all the laws that govern the
universe. You may as well ask why God made such and
such a law instead of some other one! In giving a spirit
freedom of choice, God leaves to it the entire responsibility
for its acts and their consequences. Nothing stands in the
way of its future. The path of the good or the path of evil
is an open choice. If the spirit succumbs to its trials, there
is still the consolation that not everything is lost, because
God, out of divine goodness, allows it to start over where
it failed. It is necessary to distinguish between what is the
work of God’s will and what is the work of human will. If
a danger threatens you, it is not you who have created it,
but God. However, you have willingly exposed yourself to
it, because you saw it as a way to advance, and God has
allowed it to happen.”

Question 259:
If our spirit chooses the kinds of trials it will undergo, are all
the tribulations of life therefore foreseen and chosen by us?

Answer:
“Not all of them, because it cannot be said that you have
chosen and foreseen everything that happens to you in the
world – not even the smallest things. You have chosen the
kinds of trials; the details are consequences of the position
you have chosen, and frequently, of your own actions. If
a spirit has been born among evildoers, for example, it
already knew what kind of temptations it would face, but
it did not know how it would act in any given situation;
its actions are the products of its volition or free will. In
choosing a particular path, a spirit knows it will have to
endure the struggles that arise thereon and it knows the
nature of the tribulations it will encounter, but it does
not know what events await it. The details spring from
circumstances and the force of things. Only the major
events that will influence its destiny are foreseen. If you
walk down a path full of ruts, you know you must be very
cautious because you run the risk of tripping, but you do
not know when you will trip, and maybe you will not
trip at all if you are sufficiently on your guard. If you are
walking down the sidewalk and a tile falls on your head,
you must not think that it was ‘written beforehand’, as it
is commonly said.”

Question 260:
Why would a spirit want to be born among evildoers?

Answer:
“It has to be sent into the environment in which it can
experience its requested trial. To this end, it must find an
analogous situation; for example, in order to struggle against
the instinct of thievery, it must dwell among thieves.”

– If there were no longer any evil individuals on earth,
would spirits not be able to find the necessary conditions for
certain trials?

“And would that be something to regret? That is what
happens on highly evolved worlds, where evil has no
access; thus only good spirits dwell on them. Use all your
efforts to ensure that the same happens as soon as possible
on your earth.”

Question 261:
In the trials it has to undergo to reach perfection, must a
spirit experience every type of temptation possible? In other
words, will it have to go through all the circumstances that
can trigger pride, jealousy, greed, lust, etc.?

Answer:
“Of course not. You should be aware of the fact that
there are those who from the beginning have taken a road
that has spared them many trials, but those who allow
themselves to be led along the evil road risk all its dangers.
For instance, a spirit may ask for wealth and it will be
given. Then, depending on its character, it may become
greedy or wasteful, selfish or generous, or it may indulge
in all the pleasures of sensuality. This, however, does not
mean that it had to succumb to all those tendencies.”

Question 262:
How can a spirit, who at its origin is simple, ignorant
and inexperienced, consciously choose an existence and be
responsible for its choices?

Answer:
“God compensates for its inexperience by outlining the
path it should follow, as you do for a child from birth.
However, as the spirit’s free will develops, God gradually
leaves it the freedom to choose its own way. It is at this
point that the spirit will choose the wrong path if it does
not listen to the advice of good spirits. This is what we
may call the ‘fall of man’.”

– When a spirit enjoys its free will, does the choice of its next
corporeal existence always depend solely on its own volition, or
can it be imposed on the spirit by God’s will as an expiation?

“God knows how to wait: God never hastens expiation.
Nevertheless, God can impose a certain existence on a
spirit when, due to its impurity or ill will, it is not capable
of determining what would be most useful, and when God
sees that such an existence could serve for its purification
and advancement, and at the same time, its expiation.”

Question 263:
Do spirits make their choice immediately after death?

Answer:
“No, because many of them believe in eternal punishment,
and as we have already told you, this in itself is a punishment.”

Question 264:
What guides a spirit in choosing the trials it wants to bear?

Answer:
“It chooses what may serve as an expiation according to the
nature of its wrongs and whatever might enable it to evolve
more quickly. Some spirits may impose a life of poverty
and hardship on themselves in order to try to bear it with
courage. Others may wish to experience the temptations of
fortune and power, which are much more dangerous than
poverty because of the abuse and ill use that may be made
of them, and because of the base passions they encourage.
Still others may desire to be tested in the struggles they
will have to bear in the contact with various vices.”

Question 265:
If some spirits choose contact with vice as a trial, are there
others who choose it out of affinity and the desire to live in
surroundings that cater to their tastes, or where they may give
free rein to their materialistic tendencies?

Answer:
“Of course there are, but only among those whose moral
sense is still underdeveloped; the trial derives from this, and
they must endure it for a longer time. Sooner or later, they
will understand that satisfying their crude passions has
deplorable consequences, which they will have to endure
for a period that will seem like an eternity. God may leave
them in this state until they have understood their wrongs
and then ask for the means of redeeming them through
profitable trials.”

Question 266:
Wouldn’t it be natural for a spirit to choose the least painful
trials possible?

Answer:
“For you, yes; for the spirit, no. Once it has freed itself
from matter, illusion disappears and it thinks differently.”

Human beings, subjected to the influence of carnal ideas on earth, only
see the painful side of their trials. That is why it seems logical that they
would choose those which, from their own point of view, may coexist with
material pleasures. However, in the spirit life, they compare such crude
and fleeting pleasures with the unchangeable happiness of which they
get a glimpse; then, of what importance are a few temporary hardships?
A spirit may therefore choose the hardest trial, and consequently the
most painful existence, hoping to arrive at a better state more quickly,
just as a patient often chooses the nastiest medicine in order to be healed
more quickly. Explorers who aspire to having their name linked to the
discovery of an unknown country do not choose a course covered with
flowers; they know the dangers they will have to face but they also know
the glory awaiting them if they succeed.

The doctrine of the freedom to choose our lives and the trials we
must undergo ceases to seem unusual when we consider the fact
that when spirits are disengaged from matter, they judge things
differently than we do. They foresee the goal, and that goal seems
far more important than the fleeting pleasures of the world. After
each existence, they see the steps they have already taken and they
understand what they yet lack in purity to reach the goal. That
is the reason why they willingly submit to all the vicissitudes of
corporeal life, even requesting the ones that will help them arrive
more quickly. Therefore, it should not be surprising to us that a
spirit does not prefer a softer life. In its state of imperfection, it
cannot enjoy life without suffering; it can get only a glimpse of the
goal, and it is for reaching it that it seeks to improve itself.

Do we not see similar examples every day? Do individuals who work
part of their life without rest or respite in order to accumulate what

is necessary for their well-being perform a self-imposed task with a
view to a better future? Do not soldiers who volunteer for a perilous
mission or explorers who confront dangers no less formidable in the
interest of science or their own fortune willingly submit themselves
to trials that will bring them honor and profit if they overcome
them? What will people not submit or expose themselves to for their
own gain or glory? Are not all competitive examinations voluntary
trials for improving in a chosen career? No one arrives at a highly
important social position in the sciences, arts or industry without
going through a series of lower positions, which in themselves are
other types of trials. Human life is thus a copy of the spirit life; we
find incidents of the latter in the former, only on a smaller scale. If
during our time on earth we often choose the most difficult trials,
with a view to evolving further, why would a spirit, who sees even
farther down the road, and for whom earthly life is only a fleeting
incident, not choose a painful and laborious existence if it will lead
it toward eternal happiness? Those who say that if they could choose
their existence they would ask to be princes or millionaires are like
the near-sighted who cannot see what they touch. They are like
gluttonous children who, when asked what they want to be when
they grow up answer, “a cake baker or candy maker.”

Likewise, hikers in the depths of a fog-obscured valley see neither
the length nor breadth of their path, but upon reaching the top of
a mountain, they behold the path they have traveled and how far
they still must travel and the obstacles that they must still overcome;
hence, they choose the surest means to reach their goal. Incarnate
spirits are like hikers in the depths of the valley: when freed of earthly
ties, it is as though they have reached the top of the mountain. For
the hiker, the goal is rest after a wearisome trek; for the spirit, it is
supreme happiness after its trials and tribulations.

All spirits say that in the errant state they search, study and observe
in order to make their choices. Do we not have an example of this
in the corporeal life? Do we not often spend years searching for a
career, which we end up choosing because we think it to be the
most suitable for our goals? If we fail at that one, we seek another.
Each career we embrace is a phase, a period of our life. Do we not
spend each day choosing what we will do tomorrow? So what are its
different corporeal lives to a spirit except phases, periods and days of
its spirit life, which, as we know, is the normal one? The corporeal
life is nothing more than transitory and temporary.

Question 267:
Can a spirit choose its next corporeal life during its
present one?

Answer:
“Its desire may have an influence, depending on its
intention. In the spirit state, however, it frequently sees
things quite differently. It is the spirit as such that makes
the choice; but even so, it may make it during its material
life because a spirit always has moments in which it is
independent of the matter it inhabits.”

– Don’t many individuals desire greatness and wealth, but
not as an expiation or a trial?

“Undoubtedly. It is the flesh that desires greatness and
wealth in order to enjoy them, but it is the spirit who
desires them in order to experience the tribulations they
can cause.”

Question 268:
Until it reaches the state of perfect purity, does a spirit have to
constantly undergo trials?

Answer:
“Yes, but they are not as you understand them; you call
material tribulations trials. Even though it may not yet be
perfect, a spirit who reaches a certain degree does not have
any more trials to endure. However, it always has nonsuffering duties consisting in helping others to improve
themselves; these will in turn help it evolve further.”

Question 269:
Can a spirit be mistaken as to the effectiveness of a trial it
chooses?

Answer:
“It may choose one that exceeds its strength, and then it
succumbs. It may also choose one that will not be profitable
at all; for example, a kind of idle and useless life. In such a

case, however, upon returning to the spirit world it realizes
that it has gained nothing and asks to make up for lost time.”

Question 270:
Why do persons have certain vocations or the desire to follow
one career instead of another?

Answer:
“It seems to me that you can answer this question
yourselves. Isn’t it the result of everything we have said
about the choice of trials and the progress accomplished
in a preceding existence?”

Question 271:
When a spirit in the errant state studies the conditions that
will enable it to progress, how could it possibly imagine it
could do so by being born among cannibals?

Answer:
“Spirits who have already advanced are not born among
cannibals – only those of the same nature as cannibals, or
those who are even less evolved.”

We know that our cannibals are not at the lowest degree of the
scale and that there are worlds where brutality and ferocity have no
comparison on earth. Such spirits are therefore even less evolved
than the least evolved on our world. To be among our cannibals
is progress for them, just as it would be progress for our cannibals
to exercise a profession among us that would require them to shed
blood. If they aim no higher, it is because their moral impurity does
not allow them to comprehend a more complete progress. A spirit
cannot advance except gradually; it cannot simply leap over the gap
between barbarity and civility. In this resides one of the necessities
of reincarnation, truly showing it to be in accord with God’s justice;
otherwise, what would become of the millions of beings who die
every day in the ultimate state of degradation if they had no means
of lifting themselves out of it? Why would God withhold from
them the favors granted to others?

Question 272:
Can spirits who come from a world that is less evolved than
earth or from a much less advanced people, such as cannibals,
be born amongst civilized people?

“Yes, there are those who go astray by wanting to ascend
too quickly, but they are out of place among you. They
display habits and instincts that clash with yours.”

Such beings present us with the sad spectacle of ferocity in the
midst of civility. Returning to live among cannibals would not be a
regression for them, because it would be no more than a resumption
of their proper place, even perhaps with some advantage.

Question 273:
Could a person belonging to a civilized culture reincarnate
into a less advanced one as an expiation?

Answer:
“Yes, but it would depend on the kind of expiation. Masters
who had been cruel to their servants might become servants
themselves and suffer the harsh treatment they used to
inflict on others. Those who gave orders at one time might,
in a new existence, obey those who formerly bent to their
will. This would be an expiation if they used to abuse their
power, and God can impose it on them. Furthermore, a
good spirit may choose an influential life among such a
culture to enable it to advance; in that case, it is a mission.”