The Different Orders of Spirits

Question 96:
Are all spirits equal or is there some kind of hierarchy among them?

Answer:
“They are of different orders, according to their individual
degree of self-purification.”

Question 97:
Are there a set number of orders or degrees of purification
among spirits?

Answer:
“The number is unlimited because there is no line of
demarcation that acts as a barrier between each order;
thus, the divisions may be multiplied or decreased at will.
However, if we consider their general characteristics, we
may reduce them to three principal orders.

“In the first order we may put those who have already
reached perfection: the pure spirits. In the second are
those who have reached the middle of the scale: their main
concern is the desire to do the good. In the third are those
who are toward the bottom of the scale: the imperfect
spirits. These are characterized by ignorance, the desire for
evil28 and all the passions that delay their advancement.”

28 Throughout this work, “evil” must be interpreted relatively. It does not always imply
absolute depravity or outright wickedness, as symbolized by Satan, for example. Rather,
there are varying degrees. Question 630 explains it quite simply: “Good is everything that
is in harmony with God’s law, whereas evil is everything that deviates from it. Thus, doing

Question 98:
Do the spirits of the second order only possess the desire to do
the good29 or do they also have the ability to do it?

Answer:
“Their ability depends on their degree of purification: some
possess scientific knowledge; others, wisdom and goodness.
All of them, however, have trials that they must yet endure.”

Question 99:
Are all spirits of the third order altogether evil?

Answer:
“No, some do neither good nor evil; others, however, take
pleasure in evil and are pleased when they find an opportunity
for it. Still others are frivolous or foolish spirits, more
mischievous than wicked. These take more pleasure in spite
than evil, and they also take pleasure in amusing themselves
by vexing people and causing them petty annoyances.”