Ecstasy

Question 439:
What is the difference between ecstasy and somnambulism?

Answer:
“Ecstasy is a more refined type of somnambulism – the
soul of the ecstatic is more independent.”

Question 440:
Does the soul of the ecstatic really go to higher realms?

Answer:
“Yes, it sees them and comprehends the happiness of those
who dwell there, which is why they would like to remain
there; however, there are realms inaccessible to spirits who
are not sufficiently purified.”

Question 441:
When ecstatics express the desire to leave the earth, do they speak
sincerely? And doesn’t the preservation instinct retain them?

Answer:
“That depends on the spirit’s degree of purification. If
it sees that its future situation will be better than the
present life, it makes an effort to break the ties that bind
it to the earth.”

Question 442:
If we were to abandon ecstatics to themselves, could their soul
definitively abandon their body?

Answer:
“Yes, they could die; that is why it is necessary to call them
back by means of everything that might attach them to

this world, above all making them understand that if the
chain that holds them here were to break, it would actually
be the best means of not remaining in that place where
they see that they could be so happy.”

Question 443:
Ecstatics claim to see things that are obviously the product of
an imagination overly excited by earthly beliefs and prejudices.
Thus, isn’t what they see unreal?

Answer:
“What they see is real to them, but since their spirit is
always under the influence of earthly ideas, they may see
it in their own way, or rather, they may express it in a
language according to the prejudices and ideas they were
raised with or the ones you were raised with, in order to
make themselves better understood. It is especially in this
sense that they can err.”

Question 444:
What degree of trust can be placed in ecstatics’ revelations?

Answer:
“Ecstatics can be mistaken quite frequently, especially
when they want to grasp what must remain a mystery
for humankind. In such cases, they may transmit their
own ideas, or they may become the pawns of deceiving
spirits who take advantage of their enthusiasm in order to
delude them.”

Question 445:
What consequences may be drawn from the phenomena of
somnambulism and ecstasy? Could they be a sort of glimpse
into the future life?

Answer:
“Or better stated, they get a glimpse into the past and
future life. Humans should study these phenomena
because they will find in them the solution to more than
one mystery that their reason has tried to grasp in vain.”

Question 446:
Could the phenomena of somnambulism and ecstasy be
brought into harmony with materialism?

“Those who study them in good faith and without
preconceived ideas could be neither materialist nor atheist.”