Visits between the Spirits of Living Persons

Question 413:
The principle of the soul’s emancipation during sleep seems to
indicate that we live two lives simultaneously: that of the body,
involving our life of outward relationships, and that of the soul,
involving our life of concealed relationships. Is this precise?

Answer:
“In the state of emancipation, the life of the body yields to
that of the soul, but properly speaking there are not two
lives. Instead, they are two phases of the same life; people
do not live double lives.”

Question 414:
Can two people who know each other visit each other
during sleep?

Answer:
“Yes, and many others, who do not think they know
each other while awake, meet and converse. Without
even suspecting it, you may even have friends in another
country. The phenomenon during sleep in which you
visit friends, relatives, acquaintances and individuals who
may be useful to you is so frequent that you experience it
almost every night.”

Question 415:
Of what use are these nocturnal visits if we do not
remember them?

“Ordinarily, upon awakening, an intuition remains that
is almost always the origin of certain ideas which arise
spontaneously without your being able to explain them, and
which are but the ones grasped during such colloquies.”

Question 416:
Can people cause spirit visits at will? For example, can they
say upon going to bed, “Tonight I wish to meet in spirit with
such and such person to speak with him/her and tell him/her
about such and such thing”?

Answer:
“Here is what actually happens: the person sleeps and
the spirit wakens, but the spirit is often very far from
following what the person resolved while awake because
the life of the person interests the spirit very little when
it is set free from matter. This applies to individuals
who are already quite evolved, though; the others spend
their spirit existence in an entirely different manner.
These either give in to their passions or remain inactive
altogether. Thus, it may happen that, depending on the
reason proposed, the spirit may go to visit the desired
individual, but the mere desire while awake to do so is
not its reason for actually doing it.”

Question 417:
Can a certain number of incarnate spirits meet and form a
gathering?

Answer:
“Of course. The bonds of friendships, old or new,
frequently reunite a number of spirits who feel happy at
being together.”

The word “old” refers to the ties of friendship contracted in previous
existences. Upon awakening, we bring back an intuition of the ideas
we have acquired during such concealed colloquies, even though
their source appears unknown to us.

Question 418:
If a person believed a friend to be dead but who in reality
was not, could that person meet the friend in spirit, and thus
know that she was still alive? In such a case, could this person
have an intuition about it upon awaking?

“As a spirit, the individual can certainly see the friend and
know how she is. If the belief in her death was not meant
as a trial, the person will have a presentiment that she is
alive, or that she is in fact dead.”