The Death Penalty

Question 760:
Will the death penalty someday disappear from human
legislation?

Answer:
“The death penalty will assuredly disappear and its
suppression will signal progress for humankind. When
humans become more enlightened, the death penalty will
be completely abolished on the earth. They will no longer
need to be judged by others. I speak of a time which is still
very distant for you.”

Social progress still leaves much to be desired, but we would be
unjust toward modern society if we did not see progress in the
restrictions imposed on the death penalty among more advanced
nations, and on the nature of the crimes to which its application is
limited. If we compare the safeguards by which justice is enforced to
protect the accused nowadays and the humaneness with which they
are treated (even when found guilty) with what was practiced in
the not-too-distant past, we cannot fail to recognize the path upon
which humanity is progressing.

Question 761:
The law of self-preservation gives us the right to defend
our own life. Doesn’t this right apply when we eliminate a
dangerous member from society?

Answer:
“There are other means of saving yourselves from danger
without killing. Moreover, it is necessary to open the door
of repentance to the criminal rather than to close it.”

Question 762:
Although the death penalty may be banned from civilized
societies, wasn’t it necessary in less-advanced times?

Answer:
“Necessary is not the right word. People always think a
thing is necessary when they cannot find anything better.
But as they become enlightened, they better understand
what is just or unjust, and they repudiate the excesses
committed in times of ignorance in the name of justice.”

Question 763:
Is the restriction on cases in which the death penalty is applied
an indication of the progress of civilization?

Answer:
“How can you doubt that? Doesn’t your spirit revolt when
you read the reports of the human slaughters that were
formerly perpetrated in the name of justice and frequently
in honor of the Divinity; of the tortures to which the
condemned and even the accused were submitted in order
to wrest from them, through excess pain, a confession for
a crime that they very often had not even committed?
Well then, if you had lived in those times, you would
have thought that it was all quite natural, and perhaps as a
judge you would have done even more. It is thus that what
seems just in one era seems barbaric in another. Only the
divine laws are eternal. Human laws change with progress,
and they will change further until they have been placed
in harmony with the divine laws.”

Question 764:
Jesus said, “Whoever kills by the sword shall perish by the
sword.” Don’t these words represent the consecration of the
penalty of talion? And isn’t the death imposed on the murderer
an application of this penalty?

Answer:
“Be careful! You are as mistaken about these words as you
are about many others. The penalty of talion is the justice
of God; it is God himself who applies it. You all suffer
this penalty at every moment because you are punished
wherein you have sinned either in this life or in another.
Those who have caused their fellow humans to suffer will
be in a situation in which they themselves will suffer in
like manner. This is the meaning of Jesus’ words. Didn’t
he also say to you ‘Forgive your enemies?’ And didn’t
he teach you to ask God to forgive your offenses as you
yourself forgive, that is, in the same proportion in which
you yourself have forgiven? Understand this well.”

Question 765:
What about the death penalty imposed in the name of God?

Answer:
“It is equivalent to taking God’s place in the practice of
justice. Those who act thus reveal how far they are from
actually understanding anything about God, and how
much they still have to expiate. The death penalty is a
crime where it is applied in the name of God, and those
who do so will be responsible for such murders.”