Relative Happiness and Unhappiness

Question 920:
Can people enjoy complete happiness while on earth?

Answer:
“No, because life has been given to them as either a trial or
an expiation; it is up to them to mitigate their misfortunes
and be as happy as possible while on earth.”

Question 921:
We can understand that people will be happy on the earth when
humanity as a whole is finally transformed, but meanwhile, is
it possible for anyone to enjoy relative happiness?

Answer:
“Most of the time, people are the artisans of their own
unhappiness. If they would practice the law of God, they
would spare themselves many misfortunes and enjoy a
state of happiness that is as great as their existence on such
a dense plane will allow.”

Those who have a sufficient understanding of their future destiny
do not see their corporeal existence as anything more than a quick

journey. It is like a momentary stopover at a dreadful inn. They
easily console themselves regarding a few passing annoyances on a
journey that will lead them to a better situation to the degree they
have prepared themselves for it.

We are punished in this life through the infractions we commit against
the laws of corporeal existence, through the misfortunes resulting
from such infractions and through our own excesses. If we were to
trace what we call our earthly misfortunes back to their origin, we
would see that most of them are the result of an early deviation from
the straight and true road, thereby entering onto the wrong path; and
from one thing to the next, we finally fell into disgrace.

Question 922:
Earthly happiness is relative to the position of each person,
and what might suffice for the happiness of one would be
misfortune for another. Is there nevertheless a common
standard of happiness for all?

Answer:
“For material existence, it is the possession of all that is
necessary; for the moral life, it is a good conscience and
faith in the future.”

Question 923:
Doesn’t that which would be superfluous for one become a
necessity for another, and vice versa, according to their social
position?

Answer:
“Yes, according to your materialistic ideas, your prejudices,
your ambition, and all your absurd notions, for which the
future will demand justice when you finally comprehend
the truth. Obviously, those who have had an income
of 50,000, who then see it reduced to 10,000, would
consider themselves most unfortunate because they cannot
maintain the demands of their social status: keeping good
horses and servants, gratifying all their passions, etc. They
would regard themselves as lacking the necessities. Frankly,
however, shouldn’t you consider them worthy of pity while
beside them are others who are dying of cold and hunger,
without a place to lay their head? To be happy, the wise
look down, never up; when they do lift their gaze, it is to
raise their own soul toward the infinite.” (See no. 715)

Question 924:
There are misfortunes which do not depend on the way we act
and which harm the most righteous people. Isn’t there a way
to keep ourselves from such misfortunes?

Answer:
“If you want to progress, you must resign yourselves and
endure misfortunes without complaining. However, you
will always find consolation within your own conscience,
which gives you the hope of a better future, provided you
do what is needed to obtain it.”

Question 925:
Why does God bless with the goods of wealth certain
individuals who do not seem to deserve them?

Answer:
“It looks like a favor to those who do not see beyond the
present; but you yourselves know that wealth is a trial that
is usually more dangerous than poverty.” (See nos. 814 ff.)

Question 926:
Because it creates new necessities, isn’t civilization the source
of new afflictions?

Answer:
“The misfortunes of this world result from the artificial
needs you create for yourselves. People who know how
to limit their desires, seeing without greed whatever
might lie beyond their means, spare themselves many
disappointments in this life. The wealthiest are really those
who have the fewest needs.

“You envy the pleasures of the people who appear to be the
fortunate ones of this earth. But do you happen to know
what is in store for them? If they use their wealth only
for themselves, they are selfish and will suffer a reversal.
Pity them instead. God sometimes allows the wicked to
prosper; but their prosperity is not to be envied, because

they will pay for it with bitter tears. If the righteous are
unfortunate, it is because they are going through a trial
that will be credited to them if they bear it with courage.
Remember the words of Jesus: ‘Blessed are those who
suffer, for they shall be comforted.’”

Question 927:
Superfluity is certainly not indispensable to happiness, but the
same does not apply to necessities. So isn’t the misfortune of
those who are deprived of them real?

Answer:
“They are truly unfortunate only when they lack what is
necessary for their life and the health of their body. Such
deprivation is perhaps the result of their own making, and
they can only blame themselves for it. If it has resulted
from the wrong of another, the responsibility would fall
upon the one who has caused it.”

Question 928:
Through the special nature of our natural aptitudes, God
obviously shows to each one of us our vocation in this world.
Don’t many misfortunes come from the fact that we are not
following the right vocation?

Answer:
“That is true, and many times parents are the ones who,
through pride or avarice, make their children deviate
from the path outlined for them by nature, thereby
compromising their happiness. They will be held
responsible for having done so.”

– So would you consider it right if the son of a man of the
upper classes became a cobbler, for instance, if that was his
aptitude?

“You do not need to resort to absurdities and exaggerations.
Civilization has its necessities. Why would the son of an
upper class man become a cobbler if he can do other
things? Individuals can always be useful according to their
abilities if they are not applied to something they are not
meant for. For instance, instead of a bad lawyer, they could
perhaps become a skilled mechanic, etc.”

Operating outside their proper intellectual sphere is assuredly one of
the most frequent causes of disappointment. Ineptitude in a chosen
career is an inexhaustible source of reversals. Then, pride is added to
the mix, which keeps individuals from resorting to a more humble
profession, and they often regard suicide as the ultimate remedy
for escaping from what they consider as humiliation. If a moral
education had raised them above all of the prejudices of pride, they
would never become destitute.

Question 929:
There are people who are destitute of all resources even when
there is abundance all around them, and who do not see any
other solution to their problem except death. What should
they do? Should they allow themselves to die of hunger?

Answer:
“People should never contemplate the idea of allowing
themselves to die of hunger. They can always find the
means to feed themselves if pride does not interpose itself
between need and work. We frequently say that there are
no dishonorable professions, and that it is not the job per
se that is dishonorable – words we unfortunately apply
more to others than to ourselves.”

Question 930:
It seems obvious that without the social prejudices that we
allow to dominate us, we would always be able to find some
sort of work that would enable us to make a living, even
though in a lower position. Among those who have no such
prejudices, however, or who put them aside, aren’t there those
who are unable to provide for their needs as a result of illness
or other causes independent of their will?

Answer:
“In a society organized according to the law of Christ, no
one should die of hunger.”

With a wise and provident societal organization, people would never
lack what is necessary except by their own fault, which is often the
result of their environment. When they practice the law of God,
however, there will be a social order founded on justice and solidarity,
and they themselves will be better individuals. (See no. 793)

Question 931:
Why are the suffering social classes more numerous than the
fortunate ones?

Answer:
“No one is perfectly happy. Those who are looked at as
fortunate often hide poignant afflictions. Suffering is
everywhere. However, in response to your thought I will say
that what you call the suffering classes are more numerous
because the earth is a place of expiation. When humans
have finally transformed it into the habitat of the good and
of good spirits, men and women will no longer be unhappy
in this world. It will be a terrestrial paradise for them.”

Question 932:
Why do the wicked of this world usually exert a great influence
over the good?

Answer:
“Because the good are not assertive. The wicked are
scheming and daring, whereas the good are timid. The
moment they want to, the latter will prevail.”

Question 933:
If people are usually the artisans of their material sufferings,
are they also the artisans of their mental sufferings?

Answer:
“Even more so, because their material sufferings are
sometimes independent of their will, while wounding
pride, frustrating ambition, avaricious anxieties, envy,
jealousy – in short, all the passions – comprise the torments
of the soul.

“Envy and jealousy! Happy are they who do not know
those two voracious worms! Wherever envy and jealousy
exist, there can be no calm, no repose. For those who
suffer from these maladies, the objects of their longings,
their hatred and their spite appear before them like ghosts
which do not leave them in peace and which pursue them
even in their sleep. Envious and jealous individuals live
in a continual feverish state. Is that a desirable situation?
Can’t you understand that with such passions people
create intentional punishments for themselves, and that
the earth becomes a true hell for them?”

Many expressions symbolically represent the effects of different
passions. We say: puffed up with pride, dying of envy, bursting
with jealousy or spite, etc. Such pictures state the truth very
well. Sometimes jealousy does not have a specific object. There
are persons whose nature makes them jealous of anyone who is
successful or who has risen above mediocrity, although they have
no direct interest in the matter; they are jealous solely because they
cannot reach the same level. Everything that seems to be above the
common horizon offends them, and if they formed the majority of
society, they would want everything to be brought down to their
own level. In such cases jealousy is allied with mediocrity.

People are usually unhappy because of the importance they attach to
the things of this world. Vanity, failed ambition and greed make them
unhappy. If they would raise themselves above the narrow circle of the
material life, if they would raise their thoughts toward the infinite –
which is their destiny – the vicissitudes of human existence would
seem petty and childish, like the sadness of a child who suffers the loss
of a toy that represented his or her supreme happiness.

Those who only find happiness by satisfying their pride and crude
material appetites are unhappy when they cannot satisfy them,
whereas those who are frugal feel happy with what for others would
comprise misfortune.

We are referring here to civilized people, because primitives have
needs that are much more limited and thus they do not have the same
reasons for envy and anxiety. Their way of looking at things is much
different. In the civilized state, people think about and analyze their
unhappiness, and hence they are more affected by it. On the other
hand, they can also think about and analyze the means of consolation
in the Christian sentiment that gives them the hope of a better future, and
in Spiritism, which gives them the certainty of that future.