The Means of Self-Preservation

Question 704:
Since God has given human beings the need to stay alive, does
God always provide them with the means of doing so?

Answer:
“Yes, and if they do not find them, it is because they do
not understand them. God could not have given humans
the need to stay alive without also having given them
the means. Hence, the Creator has caused the earth to
produce in such a way as to provide for the needs of all its
inhabitants, for only that which is necessary is useful; the
superfluous never is.”

Question 705:
Why doesn’t the earth always produce enough to provide for
humans’ needs?

Answer:
“Since they are ungrateful, they neglect her! Nevertheless,
she is an excellent mother. Frequently, they blame nature
for the consequences of their own incompetence or lack
of foresight. The earth would always produce what is
needed if humans knew how to be content. If she does not
supply all their needs, it is because they use her to provide
themselves with superfluities instead of necessities. Look
at the nomads in the desert. They always find enough to
live on because they do not create imaginary needs. But
when half of all that is produced is wasted on satisfying
fanciful desires, should people wonder at finding nothing
the next day, and have a reason to pity themselves at
being deprived in times of scarcity? In truth I tell you
that nature is not stingy; rather, people do not know how
to control themselves.”

Question 706:
Should we understand only the products of the soil as being
the fruits of the earth?

Answer:
“The soil is the original source from which all other
resources derive because, in the last analysis, such resources
are only a transformation of the products of the soil. For
that reason we should understand the fruits of the earth to
be everything that humans can enjoy in this world.”

Question 707:
The means of subsistence are frequently lacking for certain
individuals, even in the midst of the abundance around
them. To what is this fact due?

Answer:
“It is primarily due to the selfishness of humans, who do
not always do what they should. Next, and most often, it is
due to humans themselves. ‘Seek and you shall find’; these
words do not mean that it is enough to simply look to the
earth in order to find what you desire. Instead, you must
seek with ardor and perseverance, without indifference and
without allowing yourselves to be discouraged by obstacles
that are quite often no more than means of putting your
tenacity, patience and firmness to the test.” (See no. 534)

If civilization multiplies our needs, it also multiplies the sources of
labor and the means for living, but one must agree that in this sense
there is still much to be done. When civilization has accomplished its
task, no one will be able to say that they lack what is needed, except
through their own fault. For many, misfortune happens when they
choose a path nature has not traced out for them – and that is when
they lack the intelligence required to succeed. There is a place in the
sun for all, but on the condition that all take their own place and not
that of others. Nature cannot be responsible for the vices of social
organization and for the consequences of ambition and vanity.

We would have to be blind, however, if we did not recognize
the progress that the most advanced cultures have made in this
sense. Thanks to the laudable efforts that philanthropy and
science together have unceasingly put forth for the improvement
of humankind’s material conditions, and notwithstanding the
constant increase in population, insufficiency of production
has been attenuated – at least for the most part – and the most
calamitous years have no comparison to those in former times.
Public hygiene, that element so essential to energy and health
but unknown to our ancestors, is the object of an enlightened
mindfulness. The unfortunate and suffering find places of refuge,
and science has been put into action everywhere, contributing to
the growth of everyone’s well-being. Might it be said that we have
finally attained perfection? Oh, certainly not. But what has been
accomplished so far has given us an idea of what can be done
with perseverance if men and women are sensible enough to seek
contentment in real and serious things, rather than in the utopias
that cause them to go backward instead of advancing.

Question 708:
Aren’t there situations in which the means of subsistence do
not depend solely on human will and where the lack of the
barest necessities is a consequence of circumstances?

Answer:
“These situations are frequently cruel trials which
humans must undergo, and to which they know they will
be exposed. Their merit is in their submission to God’s
will if their intelligence does not furnish them with
some means for escaping their difficulty. If death must
touch them, they should submit to it without complaint,
remembering that their hour of true freedom has arrived,
and that despair at the final moment may cause them to lose
the fruit of their resignation.”

Question 709:
Have those, who in critical situations were obligated to
sacrifice their fellow beings to appease their hunger, committed
a crime? If it was a crime, was it lessened by the need to stay
alive, which the preservation instinct has given them?

Answer:
“I have already responded in saying that there is more
merit in undergoing all the trials of life with selflessness
and courage. In this case, there is a homicide and crime
against nature and it must be doubly punished.”

Question 710:
On worlds where their physical makeup is purer, do the living
beings have need of nourishment?

Answer:
“Yes, but their food is in keeping with their nature. Such
food would not be substantial enough for your dense
digestive systems; likewise, they would not be able to
digest yours.”