The Plurality of Worlds

Question 55:
Are all the globes spinning through space inhabited?

Answer:
“Yes, and contrary to what earthlings believe, they
themselves are far from being first in intelligence,
goodness and perfection. Nevertheless, there are
individuals who think they know the whole truth of the
matter and imagine that this little planet is the only one
privileged enough to be inhabited by reasoning beings.
Pride and vanity! They fancy that God has created the
universe only for earthlings.”

God has populated all worlds with living beings all working
toward the final objective of Providence. To believe that living
beings are limited only to their own particular spot in the universe
is to doubt the wisdom of God. However, God has never made
anything without a purpose and must have intended these worlds
to fulfill a more important role than simply entertaining our
eyes. Moreover, there is nothing in the earth’s position, size or

Creation

composition that could reasonably support the notion that to the
exclusion of many thousands of similar worlds it alone is privileged
with being inhabited.

Question 56:
Is the physical composition of all the different globes the same?

Answer:
“No, they do not resemble one another at all.”

Question 57:
Since the physical composition of all the various worlds is
not the same, do the beings inhabiting them have a different
physical organization?

Answer:
“Of course, just as on yours fish are made for living in the
water and birds for living in the air.”

Question 58:
Do the worlds farthest from the sun lack light and heat since
the sun would appear only as a distant star to them?

Answer:
“Do you believe that the sun is the only source of light
and heat? What about electricity? On some worlds,
electricity plays a role unknown to you, which is much
more important than the role it plays on earth. Besides, we
have never said that all beings are made of the same matter
as you, with organs similar to yours.”

The existence of beings on the various worlds depends on the
appropriate environmental conditions in which they are intended
to live. If we had never seen fish, we would not understand how
certain beings could live in water. The same applies to other worlds,
which no doubt contain elements unknown to us. On the earth
itself, do we not see the long polar nights being illumined by the
electricity of the aurora borealis? On other worlds, is it not possible
that electricity is more abundant than on ours and performs a
general role with effects we cannot comprehend? Hence, it could
well be that those worlds self-contain the light and heat sources
required by their inhabitants.