Justice and Natural Rights

Question 873:
Is the sentiment of justice to be found in nature itself or is it
the result of acquired ideas?

Answer:
“It is so natural that you revolt at the thought of an
injustice. Moral progress undoubtedly develops this
sentiment, but it does not create it – God has placed it in
the human heart. That is why you frequently find among
simple and unlearned people notions of justice that are
more exact than those among very knowledgeable ones.”

Question 874:
If justice is a law of nature, how may it be explained that
people understand it so differently, and that what one
individual considers just appears unjust to another?

Answer:
“It is because the passions are usually mingled with the
sentiment of justice, thereby altering it. The same thing
occurs with the majority of the other natural sentiments
and it causes things to be seen from an erroneous point
of view.”

Question 875:
How may justice be defined?

Answer:
“Justice consists in respecting the rights of others.”

– What determines these rights?

“They are determined by two things: human law and
natural law. Because humans have established laws that
are appropriate for their customs and character, such
laws have established rights that can vary with progress.
Though your current laws are not perfect, they do not
consecrate the same rights as the laws of the Medieval Era,
for instance. Even though those rights seem monstrous to
you and are now obsolete, they seemed just and natural at
the time. Therefore, the rights established by humans do
not always conform to justice. They only regulate certain
social relations, whereas in private life there are a huge
number of actions that are the exclusive jurisdiction of the
court of conscience.”

Question 876:
Outside the rights consecrated by human law, what is the
basis of justice founded on natural law?

Answer:
“Christ has told you: ‘Do unto others whatsoever you would
have them do unto you.’ God has placed in the human heart
the rule of all true justice through the desire that all have to
see their rights respected. If you are uncertain of what you
should do for your neighbor in any given circumstance, ask
yourself what you would want your neighbor to do to you
in a similar situation. God could not give you a safer guide
than your own conscience.”

In fact, the criterion of true justice is in desiring for others what we
would desire for ourselves; it is not in desiring for ourselves what we
would desire for others, which is not the same thing. Since it is not
natural to desire our own harm, then if we take our personal desire
as the norm or starting point, we can be certain that we will never
do anything for our neighbor except what is good. In all ages and in
all belief systems, humans have always sought to enforce their own
personal rights. The sublimity of the Christian religion was to take
personal rights as the basis for the rights of the neighbor.

Question 877:
Does the necessity of living in society impose any special
obligations on humankind?

Answer:
“Yes, and the first of all is that of respecting the rights of
others; those who respect the rights of others will always
be just. In your world, where so many do not practice
the law of justice, everyone resorts to reprisals, and that is
what causes trouble and confusion in your society. Social
life bestows rights and imposes reciprocal duties.”

Question 878:
Since humans can be mistaken as to the extent of their rights,
what guideline can enable them to know what limits to set on
such rights?

Answer:
“The limit of the right that each one recognizes for his or
her neighbor in relation to him or herself under the same
circumstances, and vice-versa.”

– But if all attributed to themselves the rights of their neighbor,
what becomes of subordination to superiors? Wouldn’t that
cause anarchy regarding all positions of power?

“Natural rights are the same for everybody from the least to
the greatest. God has not made some from purer clay than
others and all are equal in the divine sight. These rights are
eternal, whereas those established by humans perish with
their institutions. Moreover, all individuals sense their
own strength or weakness and will always show a certain
deference to those who deserve it because of their virtue
and wisdom. It is important to point this out so that those
who think they are superior may know their duties and
may deserve such deference. Subordination will never be
compromised if authority is in conformance with wisdom.”

Question 879:
What would be the character of those who practice justice in
all its purity?

Answer:
“They would be truly just and would be following Jesus’
example because they would practice both charity and
love towards their neighbor, without which there is no
real justice.”