Pantheism

Question 14:
Is God a distinct being, or as some believe, the result of all the
combined forces and intelligences of the universe?

Answer:
“If the latter were the case, God per se would not exist
because God would be an effect and not a cause. God
cannot be both cause and effect at the same time.

“You cannot doubt that God exists and that is the point
that matters. Believe me and do not try to go any farther.
Do not get lost in a maze from which you will not be
able to exit. Trying to go farther will not make you any
better; instead, it will probably just add to your pride by
leading you to imagine that you understand something
when you actually understand nothing at all. Therefore,
put all theories aside regarding the matter. You have much
more important things to be concerned about, beginning
with yourselves. Study your own imperfections in order to
get rid of them; that will be far more useful to you than
trying to penetrate the impenetrable.”

Question 15:
What should we think of the opinion holding that all the
bodies in nature, all the beings and globes in the universe are
components of the Divinity, and taken all together comprise
the Divinity itself; i.e. the pantheistic doctrine?

Answer:
“Since humans are unable to make themselves God, they
would like to at least be a part of God.”

Question 16:
Adherents of this theory claim that it demonstrates some of
God’s attributes: since there are an infinite number of worlds,
then God is infinite; since a void or absolute nothingness is
nowhere, then God is everywhere. God being everywhere,
because everything is an integral component of God, God
infuses all the phenomena of nature with God’s intelligence.
What can refute this viewpoint?

Answer:
“Reason. Reflect on it carefully and you will have no
difficulty in seeing how absurd it is.”

The pantheistic doctrine views God as a material being, who, even
though possessed of supreme intelligence, is nevertheless only
a larger version of us. Furthermore, since matter is continually
changing, then God would have no stability and would be subject
to all the changes and all the needs of humanity. God would thus

God

lack one of the essential attributes of the Divinity: immutability.
The properties of matter cannot be linked to the idea of God
without impairing how we think about God, and all the subtleties
of sophistry will never be able to solve the issue of God’s innermost
nature. We do not know all that God is, but we do know what God
cannot fail to be. Pantheism contradicts the most essential divine
properties by confusing the Creator with the creature. It is like
regarding an ingenious machine as being an integral component of
the machinist who invented it.

God’s intelligence is revealed in God’s works, just like an artist’s
is revealed in his or her paintings; but God’s works are no more
actually God than the painting is the artist who conceived and
painted it.