The Life of Isolation. The Vow of Silence

Question 769:
We can understand that as a general principle societal life
is founded on the laws of nature. But since all tastes are
also natural, why would a taste for absolute isolation be
condemnable if someone finds satisfaction in it?

Answer:
“Selfish satisfaction. There are also those who find
satisfaction in drunkenness. Do you approve of that?
God cannot consider as pleasing a life in which persons
condemn themselves to being useless to everyone.”

Question 770:
What is to be thought of those who live in absolute seclusion
in order to escape the pernicious contact of the world?

Answer:
“Doubly selfish.”

– But if such seclusion has expiation as its purpose through the
imposition of harsh privations, isn’t it meritorious?

“Doing mostly good rather than evil is the best expiation.
Through such seclusion they avoid one evil only to fall
into another since they neglect the law of love and charity.”

Question 771:
What should we think of those who renounce the world in
order to devote themselves to the relief of the unfortunate?

Answer:
“They evolve by putting others’ needs before their own.
They have the double merit of placing themselves above
material pleasures and of doing good by fulfilling the law
of labor.”

– And those who withdraw to seek the tranquility required for
certain kinds of labor?

“That is not the absolute withdrawal of the selfish indi­
vidual. They do not isolate themselves from society,
because they labor for it.”

Question 772:
What is to be thought of the vow of silence that has been
prescribed by certain sects since remotest antiquity?

Answer:
“You might as well ask whether speech is natural and why
God has given it. God condemns the abuse rather than
the use of divinely-granted faculties. Nevertheless, silence
is useful at times because in silence you can compose
yourself; your spirit becomes freer and can enter into
communication with us. However, a vow of silence is
foolishness. Undoubtedly, those who regard such privations
as acts of virtue have good intentions, but they are mistaken
by not sufficiently understanding the true laws of God.”

The vow of absolute silence, like the vow of isolation, deprives
individuals of the societal relations that can furnish them with
opportunities to do good and to fulfill the law of progress.