Proofs of the Existence of God

Question 4:
Where may we find proof for the existence of God?

Answer:
“In an axiom you apply to all your sciences: ‘There is no
effect without a cause.’ If you would search for the cause
of whatever is not the work of human beings, then reason
will answer your question.”

To believe in God, we need only to behold the works of creation.
The universe exists; therefore, it must have a cause. To doubt God’s
existence would be to deny that every effect has a cause and to
believe that something could have resulted from nothingness.

Question 5:
All human beings have within them the intuitive sentiment
of God’s existence. What can we conclude from this?

Answer:
“That God exists; otherwise, where would such a sentiment
come from if it were not based on something real? This
is an application of the principle that there is no effect
without a cause.”

Question 6:
Mightn’t our inner sentiment about the existence of God be
the result of education and the product of acquired ideas?

Answer:
“If that were the case, why would members of your
primitive cultures have this intuition?”

If the sentiment of the existence of a Supreme Being were only
the product of education, it would not be universal. Like all
scientific ideas, it would only exist in the minds of those who
received such education.

Question 7:
Could we find the first cause of the formation of things in the
innermost properties of matter?

God

“Even if you could, what in turn would be the cause of
those properties? There must always be a first cause.”

To attribute the first formation of things to the innermost
properties of matter would be to mistake the effect for the cause
since such properties are themselves an effect that must have had
a prior cause.

Question 8:
What about the idea that attributes the first formation of all
things to an accidental combination of matter, i.e. to chance?

Answer:
“Another absurdity! How could anyone with any common
sense believe that chance is an intelligent agent? Moreover,
what is chance? Nothing.”

The harmony that governs the forces of the universe reveals certain
set combinations and designs, and thus an intelligent power. To
attribute the first formation of things to chance would be nonsense
because chance is blind and cannot produce intelligent results. An
intelligent chance would no longer be chance.

Question 9:
Where may we see in the first cause a Supreme Intelligence,
superior to all other intelligences?

Answer:
“You have a proverb that says, ‘The workman is known
by his work.’ So, look at the work and you will find the
‘Workman’! Pride is what creates disbelief. Human pride
believes in nothing above itself, and that is why people
think they are so powerful. Poor beings! A mere breath
from God could blow them over!”

We judge the power of an intelligence by its works. Since no human
being could create what nature produces, it is obvious that the first
cause must be an intelligence superior to humankind.

Whatever may be the marvels accomplished by human
intelligence, such intelligence itself must have a cause; the
greater the results, the greater the first cause must have been. No
matter what name you give it, that intelligence is the first cause
of all things.