Forgetfulness of the Past

Question 392:
Why does the incarnate spirit lose the memory of its past?

Answer:
“Human beings cannot and must not know everything.
God, out of divine wisdom, wills it to be this way. Without
the veil that hides certain things from them, they would be
dazzled, like one who passes suddenly from the darkness
into the light. By forgetting their past, they are more fully
themselves in the present.”

Question 393:
How can individuals be responsible for their deeds and redeem their
wrongs if they cannot remember them? How can they profit from
the experience acquired in lives that have fallen into forgottenness?
We could understand that life’s tribulations might be a lesson for
them if they could remember what had caused them in the first
place, but since they do not remember them at all, each existence is
as if it were the first, and it is thus that they are always having to
start over. How can this be reconciled with the justice of God?

Answer:
“With each new existence, spirits gain more intelligence and
can better distinguish between good and evil. Where would
their merit be if they remembered their entire past? When
spirits enter their life of origin (the spirit life), their entire
previous life unfolds before them. They see the wrongs they
committed, and which are the cause of their suffering, as
well as what would have kept them from committing them
in the first place. They understand the justice of the position
assigned to them, and they thus desire a new existence that
can redeem the one that has elapsed. They seek trials similar
to those they have already experienced, or struggles they
believe will be appropriate for their advancement. They ask
spirits who are of a higher order to help them in the new
task that they are about to undertake, for they know that the
spirit who will be given to them as their guide in that new
existence will endeavor to enable them to repair their wrongs
of the past by giving them a sort of intuition about them.
This same intuition is the thought, the wrongful desire,
which frequently assaults you, and which you instinctively
resist, most of the time attributing your resistance to the
principles you have received from your parents. However, it
is the voice of conscience speaking to you and this voice is a
memory of the past, a voice that warns you not to fall into
the errors you committed previously. In that new existence,
if a spirit endures its trials with courage and resists them,
it evolves and will ascend in the spirits’ hierarchy when it
returns to be among them.”

If during our corporeal life we do not have a precise memory of
what we were and of what good or evil we did in our previous
lifetimes, we nevertheless have an intuition of them. Hence, our
instinctive tendencies are a reminiscence of our past, about which
our conscience – which represents the desire we have conceived to
no longer commit the same wrongs – warns us that we must resist.

Question 394:
On worlds more advanced than ours, where beings are not
subject to all our physical needs and infirmities, do they

understand that they are happier than we are? Happiness,
in general, is relative; we feel it by comparing it with a less
happy state. In sum, some of those worlds, though better than
ours, have not yet reached the state of perfection, and their
inhabitants must have their own annoyances. Even though
the wealthy among us do not suffer the anxieties of material
needs like the poor, they are no less subject to the same types
of tribulations that embitter their lives. Thus, I would ask
whether the inhabitants of those worlds in their own situations
feel as unhappy as we do, and whether they also complain
about their fate since they do not have the memory of a less
evolved existence for comparison.

“Two different answers apply to this question. There are
worlds among those you are speaking about, on which the
inhabitants have a clear and exact memory of their past
lives. You should understand that these can and do know
how to appreciate the happiness that God permits them to
enjoy. However, there are other worlds whose inhabitants,
situated, as you say, in better conditions than yours, are
no less subject to great annoyances, and even misfortunes.
They do not appreciate their happiness because they do
not remember an even unhappier state. Nevertheless, if
they do not appreciate it as incarnates, they will as spirits.”

In the forgetfulness of past existences, especially when they were
painful, is there not something providential where the divine
wisdom is revealed? It is on the more highly evolved worlds, when
the memory of unhappy lives is nothing more than a bad dream,
that the memory of such lives resurfaces. On less evolved worlds,
however, would present misfortunes not be increased by the
memory of everything that had been endured in the past? Therefore,
we conclude that everything that God has made is well-made, and
that it is not our place to criticize the divine works and say how God
ought to have regulated the universe.

The remembrance of our former personalities would entail serious
inconveniences. In certain cases, it could cause us a great deal of
humiliation; in others, it could exalt our pride and so hinder our
free will. God has given us just what is necessary and sufficient for
us to improve ourselves: the voice of conscience and our instinctive
tendencies keeping us from what could harm us. We would further
add that if we had the remembrance of our own former personal
acts, we would also be able to remember those of other people, and
such knowledge could have the most unpleasant effects on our social
relationships. Since we do not always have a good reason for being
proud of our past, it is almost always a blessing for a veil to have been
thrown over it. This concurs perfectly with the doctrine of the Spirits
regarding worlds that are more evolved than ours. On those worlds,
where nothing reigns except the good, there is nothing painful about
remembering the past. That is why previous lifetimes are frequently
remembered as easily as we remember what we did yesterday. As
for the sojourn that one may have had on less evolved worlds, the
memory of it is nothing more than a bad dream, as we have stated.

Question 395:
Can we obtain any revelations about our former lives?

Answer:
“Not always. Nevertheless, many know who they were
and what they did. If they were permitted to speak openly,
they would make curious revelations about the past.”

Question 396:
Some persons believe they have a vague memory of an unknown
past. It appears as a fleeting image of a dream, which in vain
they try to retain. Wouldn’t this belief simply be an illusion?

Answer:
“It is sometimes real, but much more often it is an illusion
to be guarded against; it could simply be the effect of an
over-excited imagination.”

Question 397:
In corporeal existences of a more evolved nature than ours, is
the memory of previous lives more precise?

Answer:
“Yes, as the body becomes less material, they become easier
to remember. The memory of the past is clearer for those
who inhabit worlds of a higher order.”

Question 398:
Since people’s instinctive tendencies are a reminiscence of their
past, then by studying those tendencies can they know about
the wrongs they committed?

Answer:
“Undoubtedly, to a certain point; however, it is necessary
to take into account the improvement that may have taken
place in the spirit and the resolutions it made in its errant
state. Their present existence could in fact be much better
than the preceding one.”

– Could it be worse? In other words, could persons commit
wrongs in their present existence, which they had not
committed in the preceding one?

“That depends on their advancement. If they do not
yet know how to resist trials, they could be drawn to
commit new wrongs as a consequence of the position
they themselves have chosen. But such wrongs indicate a
stationary state rather than a regressive one, because spirits
may advance or remain stationary; they do not regress.”

Question 399:
Since the tribulations of corporeal life are at the same time
expiations for past wrongs and trials for the future, does it
follow that, from the nature of these tribulations, we may
deduce the kind of preceding existence we lived?

Answer:
“Very frequently, because individuals are punished for
their particular sins. Nevertheless, we cannot make this
an absolute rule. The instinctive tendencies are a more
certain indication because the trials that a spirit undergoes
refer as much to the future as to the past.”

When the end that Providence has marked for their errant life
has arrived, spirits choose for themselves the trials to which
they desire to submit themselves, and which will hasten their
advancement; that is, the kind of existence they believe most
appropriate for furnishing them with the means to evolve, and
such trials are always related to the wrongs they must expiate.

If they triumph over them, they advance; if they succumb, they
have to start over.

Spirits always enjoy their free will. It is in virtue of this freedom that
in the spirit state they choose the trials of their upcoming corporeal
life, and in the incarnate state they deliberate over what they will or
will not do, choosing between good and evil. Denying humans their
free will would reduce them to the condition of a machine.

Integrated into corporeal life, spirits momentarily lose the
remembrance of their former lives, as though a veil hid them.
Nevertheless, they sometimes have a vague awareness of them, and
they may even be revealed under certain circumstances. However,
this does not happen except by the will of the high order spirits,
who may allow it to occur spontaneously for some useful purpose
but never to satisfy vain curiosity.

Of course, future existences cannot be revealed in any case since
they depend both on the manner in which the present existence is
completed and the later choice of the spirit.

Forgetfulness of wrongs that were committed is not an obstacle
to spirits’ improvement because, even though they do not have a
precise memory of them, the knowledge they had of them during
the errant state, in addition to the desire they conceived at that
time to repair them, guide them through their intuition and inspire
them with the thought of resisting evil. This thought is the voice of
conscience, and it is seconded by spirits who will assist them if they
heed their good suggestions.

Even though people do not know the acts they committed in
their previous lives, they can nonetheless always know the kind
of wrongs for which they became guilty and what their dominant
characteristics were. They only have to study themselves in the
present and they will be able to discern what they were in the past,
not by what they are per se but by their tendencies.

The tribulations of corporeal life are at the same time expiations for
past wrongs and trials for the future. They purify and elevate us if
we endure them with resignation and without complaint.

The nature of the trials and tribulations we undergo may also
enlighten us about what we were and what we did, as in this world
we judge the acts of a criminal by the punishment the law inflicts
on him or her. Thus, those who were proud will be punished by the
humiliation of a subaltern position; the self-indulgent and greedy by
poverty; those who were harsh toward others by the harsh treatment
they themselves will suffer; the tyrant by slavery; the bad son by the
ingratitude of his own children; the lazy by forced labor, etc.