The Resurrection of the Flesh

Question 1010:
Is the doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh a reference to
reincarnation as taught by the Spirits?

Answer:
“How could it be otherwise? This expression is similar
to so many others that only appear to be nonsensical to
those who take them literally and are driven to disbelief.
However, give it a logical interpretation, and those whom
you call freethinkers will accept it without difficulty
precisely because they are able to rationalize it. Make no
mistake, such freethinkers want nothing more than to
believe; like everyone else – perhaps even more so – they
long for the future, but they cannot accept what is absurd
to reason. The doctrine of the plurality of existences
conforms to the justice of God and it alone can explain
what is otherwise inexplicable. Why do you wonder that
this principle is found in religion itself?”

Question 1011:
Then in the dogma of the resurrection of the flesh, does the
Church teach the doctrine of reincarnation?

Answer:
“That is obvious. This doctrine is the consequence of many
things which have gone unnoticed and which will soon be
properly understood. Before long, the Church will realize
that Spiritism relates at every step to the very text of the
Holy Scriptures. Therefore, the Spirits have not come to
subvert Christianity, as some claim; on the contrary, they
have come to confirm and sanction it through irrefutable
proofs. And since the time has arrived to replace figurative
language, they speak without allegories and give things a
clear and precise meaning that cannot be the object of any
wrong interpretation. That is why it is simply a matter
of time before there will be more sincerely religious and
believing persons than there are today.”

St. Louis

Science has demonstrated the impossibility of resurrection
according to the common idea. If the remains of the human
body actually remained homogeneous, even though dispersed
and reduced to dust, we might conceive of their being reunited at
some determined time. Such is not the case, however. The body is
composed of diverse elements: oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon,
etc. Through decomposition, these elements are dispersed and will
serve to form new bodies in such a way that the same molecule
of carbon, for example, will have entered into the composition
of many thousands of different bodies (we are only speaking of
human bodies, leaving out those of animals). Consequently, an
individual may have in his or her body molecules that belonged
to humans of earlier times. The same organic molecules that you
absorb from your food, for instance, may have come from the
body of an individual whom you have known. Since matter has
a definite quantity and since its transformations are indefinite in
number, how could each one of those bodies be reconstituted
with the same elements? This implies a material impossibility. The
resurrection of the flesh cannot, therefore, be rationally accepted
except as a figure of speech symbolizing the phenomenon of
reincarnation, and as such, there is nothing shocking to reason;
nothing that may be contrary to the data of science.

It is true that according to dogma the resurrection will only occur
at the end of time, while according to the Spiritist Doctrine it
occurs everyday. Doesn’t the image of the final judgment carry a
great and beautiful metaphor, which, behind the veil of allegory,
hides one of those immutable truths that the skeptics will no longer
reject once its true meaning comes to light? Meditate well on
the Spiritist explanation concerning the future of souls and their
destiny that results from the many trials they must undergo, and it
will be apparent that with the exception of it being simultaneous,
the judgment in which their sins are condemned or absolved is
not a fiction, as disbelievers think it is. Let us further consider that
this theory is the natural consequence of the plurality of worlds –
nowadays perfectly accepted – whereas according to the doctrine of
the final judgment, the earth is the only inhabited world.