The Right of Ownership. Theft

Question 880:
Which is the first of all the natural rights of humans?

Answer:
“The right to stay alive. That is why no one has the right
to assault a fellow human being’s life or to do anything
that may compromise his or her corporeal existence.”

Question 881:
Does the right to stay alive give them the right to accumulate
what is needed to live on and to retire when they can no
longer work?

Answer:
“Yes, but they must do this as a family – like the bee –
through honest labor, and not by accumulating assets as
selfish individuals. Certain animals set an example of such
foresight.”

Question 882:
Do humans have the right to defend what they have
accumulated through their labor?

Answer:
“Hasn’t God said, ‘Do not steal?’ and Jesus, ‘Render unto
Caesar what is Caesar’s?’”

Assets that humans accumulate through honest labor are legitimate
property and they have the right to defend it because ownership
that is the fruit of labor comprises a natural right that is as sacred as
the right to work and to stay alive.

Question 883:
Is the desire to possess natural?

Answer:
“Yes, but when humans desire to possess only for themselves
and for their own personal satisfaction it is selfishness.”

– Nevertheless, isn’t the desire to possess legitimate since the
one who has enough to live on is not a burden to others?

“There are insatiable individuals who accumulate possessions
without benefit to anyone else, or merely to satisfy their
passions. Do you believe that this is approved by God?
Those who accumulate assets through their labor with the
intention of helping their neighbor practice the law of love
and of charity, and their labor is blessed by God.”

Question 884:
What is the characteristic of legitimate ownership?

Answer:
“There is only one legitimate ownership: owning something
that has been acquired without harm to others.” (See no. 808)

The law of love and justice forbids us to do to others what we would
not want them to do to us, and by this same principle it condemns
every means of acquiring property that is contrary to it.

Question 885:
Is the right of ownership unlimited?

Answer:
“Of course, everything that is legitimately acquired represents
proper ownership; but as we have said, human legislation is
imperfect and it frequently sanctions conventional rights
that natural justice does not approve of. That is why humans
reform their laws as they make progress and as they better
comprehend justice. What appears perfect in one century
appears barbaric in the next.” (See no. 795)