The Progress of Human Legislation

Question 794:
Could society be governed solely by natural laws, without
having to resort to human laws?

Answer:
“It could if humans understood them well enough. If
they were to actually practice them, such laws would
be sufficient. Society, however, has its requirements and
needs special laws.”

Question 795:
What causes the instability of human laws?

Answer:
“In times of barbarity, the strongest are the ones who make
the laws and they frame them to their own advantage. It
becomes necessary to modify them as humans comprehend
justice more clearly. Human laws become more stable as they
move toward true justice; that is to say, to the degree that they
are made for all and as they are aligned with natural law.”

Civilization has created for people new necessities that are related
to the social position such people occupy. It has been necessary to
regulate the rights and duties of such positions through human
laws. Under the influence of their passions, however, humans have
often created imaginary rights and duties that are condemned by
natural law. Nations remove these rights and duties from their
codes as they progress. Natural law is immutable and is always the
same for everyone. Human law is variable and progressive, and only
under such variable conditions at humankind’s infancy could it
have consecrated the right of the strongest.

Question 796:
Aren’t harsh criminal laws a necessity in the present state of
society?

Answer:
“A depraved society has a need for harsher laws.
Unfortunately, such laws are meant to punish a wrong
after it has already been committed, rather than to cut out
the roots of what has caused the wrong. Only education
can reform humankind, who will then have no more need
of such harsh laws.”

Question 797:
How can humankind be led to reform its laws?

Answer:
“This will occur naturally through the force of
circumstances and by the influence of moral persons
who will guide them along the path of progress. Many
things have already been reformed and many more will
be. Wait awhile!”