Organic and Inorganic Beings

Organic beings are those possessing an inner source of activity that
gives them life. They are born; they grow, reproduce and die. They are
provided with special organs in order to accomplish the various life
functions that are appropriate for their needs and their self-preservation.
They include human beings, animals and plants. Inorganic beings
possess neither vitality nor their own ability to move. They are formed
solely by the aggregation of matter: minerals, water, air, etc.

Question 60:
Does one and the same force unite the material elements in
both organic and inorganic bodies?

Answer:
“Yes, the law of attraction, which is the same for all.”

Question 61:
Is there any difference between the matter of organic and
inorganic bodies?

Answer:
“It is always the same matter, but in organic bodies it is
animalized.”

24 In his comment on sub-question 67, Kardec defines this term as “… the motive force of
organic bodies” – Tr.

Question 62:
What is the cause of the animalization of matter?

Answer:
“Its union with the vital principle.”

Question 63:
Does this vital principle reside within some particular agent
or is it merely a property of organized matter; in other words,
is it a cause or an effect?

Answer:
“It is both. Life is an effect produced by the action of this
agent upon matter. However, without matter the agent is
not life, just as matter cannot be alive without the agent. It
gives life to all beings that absorb and assimilate it.”

Question 64:
We have seen that spirit and matter are two elements
comprising the universe. Does the vital principle form a third?

Answer:
“It is certainly one of the elements required in the
composition of the universe, but it has its origin in the
modifications of the one universal matter. You may regard
it as an element like oxygen or hydrogen, but even these
are not truly primitive elements, because they both derive
from one and the same principle.”

– That would seem to imply that vitality does not result from a
separate primitive agent, but rather from a special property of the
universal matter, which has undergone certain modifications.

“That follows from what we have just stated.”

Question 65:
Does the vital principle reside in any one of the bodies known to us?

Answer:
“Its source is in the universal fluid; it is what you call
the magnetic fluid or the animalized electric fluid – an
intermediary; the link between spirit and matter.”

Question 66:
Is the vital principle the same for all organic beings?

Answer:
“Yes, but it is modified according to each species. It is
this principle that enables all species to move and act.
It also distinguishes them from inert matter because the
movement of matter per se is not life. Matter is moved; it
does not produce movement by itself.

Question 67:
Is vitality a permanent attribute of the vital agent, or does it
only develop through the functioning of the organs?

Answer:
“It develops only as the body develops. Haven’t we already
stated that without matter this agent is not life per se? The
union of the two is necessary to produce life.”

– Could we say that vitality is in a latent state whenever the
vital agent is not united with a body?

“Yes, that is the case.”

The organs as a whole comprise a sort of mechanism that is driven
by the inner activity or vital principle residing within them. This
vital principle is the motive force behind all organic bodies. It gives
impulse to the organs, whose action reciprocally maintains and
develops the vital principle – somewhat as friction develops heat.
