Life and Death

Question 68:
What causes the death of organic beings?

Answer:
“Their organs wear out.”

– Could we compare death to the cessation of movement in a
machine that has broken down?

“Yes. If the machine has been badly assembled, it breaks
down; likewise, if the body becomes diseased, life leaves it.”

Question 69:
Why does a lesion in the heart seem to cause death more often
than one in any other organ?

Answer:
“The heart is a life-producing machine. Nevertheless, it is
not the only organ in which a lesion causes death; it is only
one of the body’s essential parts.”

Question 70:
What happens to the matter and the vital principle of organic
beings after death?

Answer:
“The inert matter decomposes and is used to form other
beings; the vital principle returns to the vital mass.”

After the death of the organic being, the elements that had formed
its body undergo new combinations to form new beings. These
new beings in turn draw the principle of life and activity from the
universal source; they absorb and assimilate it, and restore it again
to that source as soon as they themselves cease to exist.

The organs are impregnated (so to speak) with the vital fluid25, which
enables all the body’s components to actively communicate with
one another when certain lesions occur and to restore functions that
have temporarily ceased. However, when the elements essential for
the functioning of the organs are destroyed or profoundly altered,
the vital fluid cannot transmit this life-giving movement to them,
and the organism dies.

A body’s organs necessarily react upon one another to a lesser or
greater extent, and this reciprocity of action results from their being
in harmony as a whole. Their functions cease when something
destroys this harmony, just like what occurs in the movement of
a mechanism when its essential components break down, or like a
clock that has been worn out by use or broken by accident, and in
which there is no longer any motive force to keep it running.

We have an even better image of life and death in an electronic
device. Such a device receives electricity and stores it in a latent
state – as do all bodies in nature. However, the electric phenomenon
does not manifest until the electric fluid is put in motion by a
certain cause; only then can we say that the device is alive. When
the cause of the activity ceases, so does the phenomenon: the
device returns to the state of inertia. Organic bodies may thus
be compared to batteries or electronic devices in which the vital
fluid’s activity produces the phenomenon of life; the cessation of
this activity causes death.

The amount of vital fluid is not the same in all organic beings. It
varies according to species and is not constant in the same individual
or in the various individuals of the same species. There are those
who are saturated (so to speak) with this fluid, while others possess
barely enough of it. That is why for some life is more active, more
energetic and, in a certain way, more superabundant.

The amount of vital fluid may become depleted and insufficient for
maintaining life if it is not renewed by absorbing and assimilating
substances that contain it.

Finally, the vital fluid may be transmitted from one individual to
another. Those who have greater quantities of it can give it to those
who have less, and in certain cases they can bring back a life on the
verge of being extinguished.