Spirits during Battle

Question 541:
During battle, are there spirits who assist in it and who aid
each of the forces in the fight?

Answer:
“Yes, and who stimulate their courage.”

Thus, the ancients represented the gods as taking the side of this or
that people. Such gods were nothing more than spirits represented
by allegorical figures.

Question 542:
In war, justice is always on one side only. How can spirits
support the one that is in the wrong?

Answer:
“You know perfectly well that there are spirits who seek
only discord and destruction. For them war is war. The
justness of the cause means little to them.”

Question 543:
Can certain spirits influence generals in the conception of
their plans for a particular campaign?

Answer:
“Absolutely. Spirits can influence them in this as in all
conceptions.”

Question 544:
Can evil spirits suggest faulty plans to them in order to lead
them to defeat?

Answer:
“Yes, but don’t they have free will? If their judgment does
not enable them to distinguish a good idea from a bad
one, they will suffer the consequences and would do better
at obeying than commanding.”

Question 545:
Can generals sometimes be guided by a type of second sight,
an intuitive perception that shows them the result of their
strategies beforehand?

Answer:
“That is frequently what happens with geniuses. It is what
they call inspiration and it enables them to act with a type
of certainty. This inspiration comes to them from the
spirits who guide them, and who use the faculties with
which such individuals have been endowed.”

Question 546:
In the heat of combat, what happens to the spirits of those who
die? Are they still interested in the battle after death?

Answer:
“Some continue to be interested; others withdraw.”

The same thing happens in combat as occurs in all cases of violent
death. At first, such spirits are surprised and bewildered. They do not
believe they are dead and they think they are still taking part in the
action. It is only little by little that reality imposes itself on them.

Question 547:
After death, do the spirits of those who had fought each other
while alive still regard one another as enemies and continue
to be hostile toward each other?

Answer:
“In such moments, spirits are never calm. At first, they may
still hate their enemy and even pursue them, but when
they regain their composure, they see that their animosity
no longer has any motive. Nevertheless, they may retain
greater or lesser traces of it, depending on their character.”

– Do they still hear the din of the battle?

“Yes, perfectly.”

Question 548:
Do spirits who calmly watch a battle as spectators witness
the separation of soul from body? How does this phenomenon
appear to them?

Answer:
“Very few deaths are truly instantaneous. Most of the time,
a spirit whose body has been mortally wounded is not
aware of it at the time. Only when consciousness begins
to return can the spirit be seen moving beside its corpse.
This appears so natural that the sight of the dead body
lying there does not produce any disagreeable effect. All
life having been transferred into the spirit, only the spirit
attracts attention, and it is the spirit with whom spectators
converse, or to whom they give orders.”