Somnambulism

Question 425:
Does natural somnambulism have any connection to dreams?
How can it be explained?

Answer:
“It is a state of the soul in which its independence is
more complete than in dreams; thus, its faculties are
more unrestrained. The soul has perceptions that it does
not attain in the dream state, which is actually a state of
imperfect somnambulism.

“In somnambulism, the spirit is in total possession of
itself, but the physical organs are in a sort of cataleptic
state and no longer receive external impressions. This
state manifests especially during sleep, the time during
which the spirit can temporarily leave the body, while
the body enjoys the repose that is indispensable to
matter. When somnambulistic-related activity occurs,
it is because the spirit is preoccupied with one thing or
another that requires the physical body, which it then
uses in the same way it would if it were to employ a table
or other material object in the phenomena of physical
manifestations, or a hand in written communications. In
dreams that you are conscious of, the sensorial organs,
including those related to memory, begin to awaken
and imperfectly receive the impressions produced by
objects or external causes, and communicate them to the
spirit. The spirit, also in a state of repose, only perceives
confused and often fragmentary sensations, which
without any apparent reason are mixed in with vague
memories of either the present life or previous ones. It
is therefore easy to understand why somnambulists do
not remember anything and why most of the time the
dreams they do remember have no meaning. I say most of
the time because sometimes dreams are the consequence
of a precise memory of events of a previous life, and
sometimes even a sort of intuition of the future.”

Question 426:
Does so-called magnetic somnambulism have any connection
to natural somnambulism?

Answer:
“It is the same thing with the difference that it is artificially
induced.”

Question 427:
What is the nature of the agent called the magnetic fluid?

Answer:
“It is the vital fluid or animalized electricity, and is a
modification of the universal fluid.”

Question 428:
What is the cause of somnambulistic clairvoyance?

Answer:
“We have already told you: it is soul sight.”

Question 429:
How can the somnambulist see through opaque objects?

Answer:
“No object is completely opaque  – except to your
dense organs. We have already stated that matter is no
obstacle to spirits, since they can pass right through it.
Somnambulists frequently tell you that they see through
their forehead, through their knee, etc., because you are
entirely immersed in matter and do not understand that
they can see without the help of the organs; nonetheless,
at your insistence, they believe they actually need them.
If you were to leave them alone, however, they would
understand that they see through all the parts of the body,
or, rather, that they see apart from their body.”

Question 430:
Since the clairvoyance of somnambulists is that of their soul or
spirit, why don’t they see everything, and why do they so often
make mistakes?

Answer:
“First, it is not given to imperfect spirits to see everything
and know everything. You know very well that they still share
your errors and prejudices. Second, while they are connected
to matter they do not enjoy all their spirit faculties. God has
given clairvoyance to humankind for a useful and serious
purpose, and not so that it may learn what it should not
know. That is why somnambulists do not know everything.”

Question 431:
What is the source of somnambulists’ innate ideas, and how
can they speak with such precision about things of which they
are ignorant in the waking state, and which are even above
their intellectual capacity?

Answer:
“It just so happens that somnambulists may actually
possess more knowledge than you might think, but it is
dormant – their corporeal envelope is too imperfect for
them to be able to remember such knowledge. But who are
they, after all? Like us, they are spirits who have incarnated
to fulfill their mission, and the somnambulistic state into
which they enter awakens them from their mental lethargy.
We have repeatedly told you that humans live many times
and when they reincarnate it causes the material loss of
what they had learned in a previous life. When they enter
what you call the crisis state, they remember what they
already know, but always incompletely. They know, but
they cannot say where such knowledge comes from or why
they have it. When the crisis passes, the memory is erased
entirely and they return to their waking state knowledge.”

Experience
has
shown
that
somnambulists
also
receive
communications from other spirits, who transmit to them what
they must say and supply them with what they lack. This is
especially seen in cases involving medical prescriptions: the spirit
of the somnambulist discerns what the malady is and another
spirit indicates the remedy. This double action is sometimes
patent, whereas at other times it is revealed through their frequent
expressions: They are telling me to say, or they are forbidding me to
say such and such. In the latter case, it is always dangerous to insist
on obtaining information that has been denied; otherwise, the door
opens to frivolous spirits who unscrupulously talk about everything
without being at all interested in the truth.

Question 432:
How do you explain the remote viewing ability that some
somnambulists experience?

Answer:
“Doesn’t the soul travel about during sleep? The same
thing occurs in somnambulism.”

Question 433:
Does the greater or lesser development of somnambulistic
clairvoyance depend on the physical organization of the body
or on the nature of the incarnate spirit?

Answer:
“On both. There are physical dispositions that allow the
spirit to disengage itself easily or not so easily from matter.”

Question 434:
Are the faculties that the spirit of the somnambulist enjoys the
same as those of the spirit after death?

Answer:
“To a certain extent, but the somnambulist’s spirit still
finds itself attached to matter, and one must take this fact
into account.”

Question 435:
Can somnambulists see other spirits?

Answer:
“Most can see them very easily, but it depends on the
nature and degree of their lucidity. However, sometimes
they do not at first understand what other spirits are and
thus mistake them for corporeal beings. This happens
especially with those who have no knowledge of Spiritism,
because they do not yet comprehend the nature of spirits;
their human appearance fools them and that is why they
think they are seeing living persons.”

The same effect is produced at the moment of death among those
who think they are still alive. Nothing around them appears to have
changed. Spirits appear to them as having bodies similar to ours
and they mistake the appearance of their own bodies as being real.

Question 436:
Do somnambulists who see at a distance see from the place
where their body is or from where their soul is?

Answer:
“Why ask such a question, since it is the soul that sees and
not the body?”

Question 437:
Since it is actually the soul that travels about, how can
somnambulists experience in their body the sensations of the
heat or cold of the place where their soul is, which is sometimes
very far from where their body actually is?

Answer:
“Their soul has not entirely left the body. It always remains
connected to it by the tie that joins them, and this tie is the
conductor of sensations. When two persons correspond
between one city and another by means of electricity, the
electricity is the tie between their thoughts; thanks to it,
they can communicate as though they were right next to
each other.”

Question 438:
Does the use that somnambulists make of their faculties
during life influence the state of their spirit after death?

Answer:
“Very considerably, like the good or bad use of all the
faculties that God has given to human beings.”