Earthly Sympathies and Antipathies

Question 386:
Could two individuals who have already known and loved
each other meet in another corporeal existence and recognize
each other?

Answer:
“Recognize each other, no; feel attracted to each other,
yes. Frequently, intimate connections founded on sincere
affection arise from no other cause. Two individuals are
drawn together by apparently fortuitous circumstances,
but it is actually the result of the attraction of two spirits
who have been searching for each other amidst the crowds.”

– Wouldn’t they find great pleasure in being able to recognize
each other?

“Not always. The memory of past lives might hold greater
disadvantages than you suppose. After death, they will
recognize each other and will remember the time they
spent together.” (See no. 392)

Question 387:
Is sympathy always the result of their having known each
other previously?

Answer:
“No. Two spirits who have affinities naturally search for
each other without their having been previously acquainted
as incarnates.”

Question 388:
Wouldn’t the encounters which sometimes occur between
certain persons, and which are attributed to chance, be the
effect of a kind of sympathetic relationship?

Answer:
“Among thinking beings there are connections that you
do not yet know anything about. Magnetism is at the core
of this science, which you will later comprehend better.”

Question 389:
Where does the instinctive repulsion come from when certain
individuals meet each other for the first time?

Answer:
“They are antipathetic spirits who perceive and recognize
each other without ever having spoken to each other.”

Question 390:
Is instinctive antipathy always a sign of an evil nature?

Answer:
“Two spirits are not necessarily evil just because they
are not sympathetic. Antipathy may originate from a
dissimilarity in their way of thinking. As they evolve,
however, these shades of dissimilarity are erased and the
antipathy disappears.”

Question 391:
Does the antipathy between two individuals arise first in the
one whose spirit is worse or in the other whose spirit is better?

Answer:
“It arises in both, but the causes and effects are different.
An evil spirit feels antipathy towards anyone who may be
able to judge and unmask it. Upon seeing a person for the
first time, it perceives that that person will disapprove of
it. Its dislike then changes into hatred and envy, which
inspire it with the desire to do evil. The good spirit, on the
other hand, is repulsed by the evil one because it knows it
will not be understood by the other and that neither shares
the same sentiments. However, aware of its higher moral
principles, it feels neither hatred nor jealousy toward the
other: it is content to simply avoid and pity it.”