The Possessed

Question 473:
Can a spirit temporarily take over the corporeal envelope of a
living person? In other words, can it enter an animate body
and replace the spirit incarnated in it?

Answer:
“A spirit does not enter a body as you enter a house.
Instead, it associates with an incarnate spirit who has
its same defects and qualities so that they can both act
conjointly. Nevertheless, it is always the incarnate spirit
who acts upon the matter enveloping it and according
to its own wishes. A spirit cannot replace the one who is
incarnate because the spirit is connected to the body until
the time set for the end of its material existence.”

Question 474:
If there is no such thing as possession per se, that is, the
cohabitation of two spirits in the same body, may a spirit
nonetheless find itself dependent on another spirit so that it
sees itself “subjugated” or “obsessed” by it to such a degree that
its own will is in some way paralyzed?

“Yes, and these are the truly possessed. You must
understand, however, that this kind of domination never
occurs without the participation of the one who suffers
it, either through weakness or desire. Epileptics and insane
individuals have often been taken as being possessed, but
they are in need of a doctor rather than an exorcist.”

In its common acceptance, the word possession presumes the
existence of demons – a category of beings of a depraved nature –
and the cohabitation of one of these beings with the soul of an
individual in his or her body. But since there are no demons in
this sense and since two spirits cannot simultaneously inhabit the
same body, there can be no one who is possessed according to the
idea normally attached to the word. By the expression possessed, one
should only understand it to mean the absolute dependence of a
soul in relation to the imperfect spirit who has subjugated it.

Question 475:
Can these persons by themselves repel such evil spirits and free
themselves from their domination?

Answer:
“You can always rid yourself of any burden when you have
a firm will.”

Question 476:
Couldn’t it be the case that the obsession by an evil spirit is
such that the subjugated person does not even perceive it?
Couldn’t a third person put an end to the subjection, and in
such a case, what role should he or she play?

Answer:
“If the individual is morally upright, his or her will power may
help by appealing to the cooperation of good spirits, because
the more moral a person is, the more power that person
has regarding imperfect spirits in order to repel them, and
regarding good ones in order to attract them. Nevertheless,
this third person will be completely powerless if the one who
is subjugated does not cooperate; after all, there are persons
who take delight in a dependence that satisfies their tastes and
desires. In all cases, however, those who do not have a pure
heart cannot have any influence whatsoever – good spirits
ignore them and evil ones do not fear them.”

Question 477:
Are exorcism formulas at all effective against evil spirits?

Answer:
“No. When these spirits see anyone who takes such
formulas seriously, they laugh and persevere.”

Question 478:
There are persons animated by good intentions, but who are
obsessed nevertheless. What are the best means for them to free
themselves from obsessing spirits?

Answer:
“Tire their patience, pay no attention to their suggestions
and show them that they are wasting their time; then,
when they see they can do nothing, they will withdraw.”

Question 479:
Is prayer an effective means for curing obsession?

Answer:
“Prayer is a powerful aid in everything, but you must
realize that it is insufficient to simply mutter a few words
to obtain what you desire. God helps those who act – not
those who limit themselves merely to asking. Therefore,
obsessed persons must do their part in order to destroy in
themselves the cause that attracts evil spirits.”

Question 480:
What should be thought about the expulsion of demons,
spoken of in the Gospel?

Answer:
“That depends on the interpretation. If you mean by
demon an evil spirit who subjugates an individual, when
its influence is destroyed, it will truly be expelled. If you
attribute an illness to a demon, when you have cured the
sickness, you will also have expelled the demon. A thing
may be true or false according to the meaning given to the
words. The greatest truths may seem absurd when only the
form is observed and when an allegory is taken for reality.
Understand this well and try to remember it because it is
of universal application.”