Kinships, Affiliation

Question 203:
Do parents transmit a portion of their soul to their children
or do they give them only animal life, to which a new soul
afterwards adds the moral life?

Answer:
“Only animal life, since the soul is indivisible. Daft parents
may have intelligent children, and vice versa.”

Question 204:
Since we have had many existences, does kinship go back to
previous ones?

Answer:
“It could not be otherwise. The succession of corporeal
lives establishes ties among spirits dating back to former
existences. Such frequently gives rise to the affinity between
you and some spirits who you might think are strangers.”

Question 205:
According to certain individuals, the doctrine of reincarnation
appears to destroy family ties by carrying them back to previous lives.

Answer:
“Instead of destroying them, it extends them. Since
kinships may be based on previous affections, the ties
that unite members of the same family are less precarious.
Moreover, reincarnation broadens the duties of fraternity
because your neighbor or your servant may be a spirit who
was formerly related to you by blood.”

– It does, however, diminish the importance that some attach
to their familial affiliation because their father may be a
spirit who had previously belonged to a different race, or who
had occupied a much different social position.

“That is true, but such importance is founded on pride. What
most people honor in their ancestors are title, class and fortune.
They would blush if they had had an honest shoemaker for
a grandfather, but would boast if they had descended from a
debauchee of noble birth. No matter what people say or do,
they will not prevent things from being what they are, for God
does not regulate the laws of nature according to their vanity.”

Question 206:
Since there may be no actual affiliation among the spirits of
a particular family’s descendants, would it be foolish for the
members to honor their ancestors?

Answer:
“Assuredly not, because they should feel happy belonging
to a family in which more highly evolved spirits have
incarnated. Although spirits do not proceed from one
another, they have no less affection for those who are linked
to them by family ties, for they are often attracted to this
or that family because of affinities or previous connections.
You may be very sure that the spirits of your ancestors do
not feel honored at all with the respect you render them out
of pride. Their merits do not benefit you except as you strive
to follow their moral example. Only in that way can your
memories not only be pleasant but even useful to them.”