Virtues and Vices

Question 893:
Which is the most meritorious of all the virtues?

Answer:
“All virtues are meritorious because all are signs of progress
on the path of the good. There is always virtue when there
is voluntary resistance to the allure of evil tendencies.
However, the highest virtue consists in the sacrifice of
one’s own interests for the good of one’s neighbor without
ulterior motives. The greatest merit is that which is based
on the most disinterested charity.”

Question 894:
There are persons who do good through a spontaneous impulse
without having to struggle with any contrary sentiment. Do
they deserve the same merit as those who have to struggle
against their own nature, and who manage to overcome it?

Answer:
“Those who do not have to struggle have already made
progress. They struggled and triumphed in the past. That is
why good sentiments cost them no effort and their actions
seem so easy – doing good has become a habit for them. They
should be honored as old warriors who have earned their ranks.

“Since you are still far from perfection, such examples
surprise you by their contrast and you admire them so
much because they are rare. However, you must know
that on worlds more advanced than yours, what is the
exception among you has become the rule. The sentiment
of the good is spontaneous everywhere on those worlds
because they are inhabited only by good spirits, and a
single bad intention would be a monstrous exception. That
is why humans are so happy there. The same will occur on
the earth when humanity transforms itself, and when it
understands and practices charity in its true meaning.”

Question 895:
Besides the defects and vices about which no one can be
mistaken, what is the most characteristic sign of imperfection?

Answer:
“Self-centeredness. Moral qualities many times do not stand up
when put to the test, like copper gilding that cannot withstand
the test of the touchstone. Individuals may possess real qualities
that make them appear moral to the world. However, while
such qualities do indicate progress, they do not always bear up
under certain trials, and sometimes it takes only one touch of
self-centeredness to unmask these individuals’ real character.
True selflessness is in fact so rare on earth that it is admired as a
remarkable phenomenon when it displays itself.

“Attachment to material things is a notorious indication
of impurity because the more humans are attached to the
things of this world, the less they understand their true
destiny. Through selflessness, however, they show that
they see the future from a more evolved point of view.”

Question 896:
There are selfless individuals who nonetheless lack discernment,
and who waste their possessions without real benefit because they
do not know how to use them reasonably. Will they have any merit?

Answer:
“They have merit for their selflessness but not for the
potential good they could do. If selflessness is a virtue,
thoughtless squandering is always, at the very least, a lack
of judgment. Fortune is not given to some to be cast to the
wind any more than it is given to others to be locked up
in a safe. It is a deposit for which they will have to render
account. They will have to answer for all the good they
could have done but did not do, and for all the tears they
could have dried with the money they gave away to those
who were not actually needy.”

Question 897:
Are those blameworthy who do good without seeking a reward
on earth, but in the hope that it may be taken into account in
the next life so that their situation there may be better? And
does such a thought harm their advancement?

Answer:
“One must do good out of charity, that is, selflessly.”

– Nevertheless, all have the very natural desire to progress in
order to emerge from the painful situation of this life. The
Spirits teach us to do good with that purpose in mind. So
would it be wrong to think that through practicing the good
we may hope for a better situation?

“Certainly not; however, those who do good without
ulterior motives, who do it for the sole pleasure of being
pleasing to God and their suffering neighbor, have already
found a certain degree of advancement, which will enable
them to attain happiness more quickly than those who
do good through calculation and not through the natural
impulse of their heart.” (See no. 894)

– Shouldn’t we make a distinction here between the good that
can be done for our neighbor and the care we devote to correcting
our own defects? We know that doing good with the thought
that it will be counted to us in the next life has little merit,
but would it also be a sign of impurity if we were to amend
ourselves, conquer our passions and correct our character with

the aim of bringing ourselves nearer to the good spirits and of
receiving a higher position in the spirit world?

“No, no; by ‘doing good’ we merely mean being charitable.
Those who calculate what each one of their good actions
can render them in the other life or in the earthly life
proceed selfishly. But there is no selfishness in improving
oneself in the hope of drawing nearer to God because that
is the objective for all.”

Question 898:
Since the corporeal life is only an ephemeral sojourn on this
world and since our future life should be our principal concern,
is it worthwhile to put forth the effort to acquire scientific
knowledge that only bears upon material things and necessities?

Answer:
“Absolutely. First, it enables you to help your brothers and
sisters. Next, your spirit will evolve more quickly if it has
progressed intellectually. In the hiatus between incarnations
you will learn in one hour what would require years on
earth. No knowledge is useless; it all contributes in some
degree to advancement because the perfected spirit must
know everything. Since progress must be made in every
sense, all acquired ideas help the development of the spirit.”

Question 899:
Of two wealthy individuals, one was born in opulence and has
never known need, whereas the other owes his fortune to his
own labor. However, both employ their wealth exclusively for
their own personal satisfaction. Which one is the more culpable?

Answer:
“The one who has known hardship. He knows what it
means to suffer but does not relieve it in others; as usually
happens, he no longer remembers his hardship.”

Question 900:
Do those who continue to accumulate assets without benefiting
anyone have a valid excuse in saying that they are doing so in
order to leave the assets to their heirs?

Answer:
“It attests to their bad principles.”

Question 901:
Of two misers, the first deprives himself of necessities and dies
of want atop his treasure, whereas the second is only stingy
toward others but is extravagant toward himself. While he
recoils before the smallest sacrifice to render a service or do
something useful, nothing seems better to him than satisfying
his own tastes and passions. If a favor is asked of him, he is
always ill-willed, but if a whim strikes, he is always ready to
satisfy it. Which of them is guiltier and which of them will
have the worse place in the spirit world?

Answer:
“The one who spends. He is more selfish than the miser.
The miser has already received part of his punishment.”

Question 902:
Is it wrong to desire wealth with the desire to do good?

Answer:
“Such a sentiment is of course laudable if it is pure. But is
such a desire always disinterested enough? Doesn’t it hide
a personal ulterior motive? Isn’t the first person to whom
we wish to do good many times our own self?”

Question 903:
Is it wrong to study others’ defects?

Answer:
“If it is for the purpose of criticizing and divulging them
it is wrong because it displays a lack of charity. If it is with
the intention of applying it to oneself in order to avoid the
same defects it may be useful. You must not forget, however,
that tolerance for the defects of others is one of the virtues
entailed in charity. Before criticizing people’s imperfections,
think about whether others may say the same about you. So
try to possess qualities that are opposite to the defects you
criticize in others. This is a means of perfecting yourself.
If you criticize them for being avaricious, be generous; for
being harsh, be nice; for acting with pettiness, be expansive
in all your actions. In a word, act in such a way that these
words of Jesus may not apply to you: ‘You see the speck in
your neighbor’s eye, but do not see the beam in your own.’”

Question 904:
Is it wrong for a person to probe the ills of society and expose them?

Answer:
“That depends on the sentiment leading the person to do so.
If a writer only wants to create a scandal, he or she does so out
of personal pleasure, publishing material that generally sets a
bad example rather than a good one. The spirit enjoys it, but
it can be punished for the pleasure it feels in revealing evil.”

– In such cases, how can we judge a writer’s purity of intention
and sincerity?

“There is no need to do so. If the message is good, benefit
from it; if it is bad, it becomes a problem for the writer’s
own conscience. Moreover, if writers desire to prove their
sincerity, it falls to them to support their principles by
setting their own example.”

Question 905:
Some authors have published works that are beautiful and morally
uplifting, which help the progress of humankind, but which they
themselves do not take advantage of. As spirits, will the good they
have done through their works be taken into account?

Answer:
“Morality without action is like the seed without the sowing.
What use is the seed if you do not make it grow in order to
feed you? Those persons are guiltier because they possessed
the intelligence to comprehend. Having not practiced the
maxims they offered to others, they fail to harvest the fruit.”

Question 906:
Is it reprehensible for those who do good to be conscious of
their deeds and to acknowledge them to themselves?

Answer:
“Since they can be aware of the evil they do, they must be
equally aware of the good in order to know if they act rightly
or wrongly. It is in weighing all their actions on the scales of
God’s law – especially on those of the law of justice, love, and
charity – that they can tell whether their actions are good or
bad, and thus approve or disapprove of them. Hence, they
cannot be at fault for recognizing the fact that they have
triumphed over their evil tendencies, and for being satisfied
for having done so, provided they do not grow vain, for that
would be to fall into another wrong.” (See no. 919)