Cruelty

Question 752:
May we link the sentiment of cruelty to the instinct of
destruction?

“It is the destruction instinct in its worst form because,
even though destruction is sometimes necessary, cruelty
never is. It is always the result of an evil nature.”

Question 753:
Why is cruelty the dominant characteristic of primitive peoples?

Answer:
“Among primitive peoples  – as you call them  – matter
dominates spirit. They abandon themselves to their animal
instincts, and since they do not have any other needs
beyond those of the body, they care only about their own
self­-preservation. This is what usually makes them cruel.
Moreover, peoples of imperfect development are under the
dominion of equally imperfect spirits. These imperfect spirits
remain sympathetic to them until more highly advanced
peoples come to destroy or weaken their influence.”

Question 754:
Doesn’t cruelty result from an absence of moral sense?

Answer:
“You may say that the moral sense is not developed, but
do not say that it is absent, since it exists in principle in all
human beings. This moral sense is what later transforms
them into good and humane beings. It exists in the
primitive like the onset of the aroma in the bud of the
flower that has not yet opened.”

All faculties exist in humans in a rudimentary or latent state and
develop according to how favorable the circumstances are. The
excessive development of some impedes or neutralizes that of
others. The overexcitement of the material instincts stifles (so to
speak) the moral sense, as moral development gradually weakens
the purely animal faculties.

Question 755:
Why is it that in the most advanced civilizations there are
individuals who are at times as cruel as barbarians?

Answer:
“For the same reason that on a tree loaded with good fruit
there is always some that is rotten. Such individuals have,
if you wish, only the appearance of civility, like wolves
in sheep’s clothing. Low order, very backward spirits, may
incarnate among advanced people in the hope of their
own progress. However, if the trial is too difficult, their
barbaric nature prevails.”

Question 756:
Will the society of moral individuals someday be purged of
evildoers?

Answer:
“Humankind is evolving. Those who are dominated
by the instinct of evil and who are out of place among
moral people will disappear little by little – like bad grain
being separated from the good when threshed – but they
will be born again in other envelopes. Then, with more
experience, they will comprehend good and evil better.
You have an example in the plants and animals that you
have learned how to perfect by developing new qualities
in them. Very well, it is only after many generations that
perfection becomes complete. This is a picture of the
different existences of human beings.”