The March of Progress

Question 779:
Do humans draw from within themselves the power to progress,
or is progress nothing more than the result of education?

Answer:
“They advance naturally by themselves. Not all progress
at the same time or in the same manner, however, and it
is through social contact that the most advanced help the
others to progress.”

Question 780:
Does moral progress always follow intellectual progress?

Answer:
“It is its consequence, but it does not always follow it
immediately.” (See nos. 192-365)

– How can intellectual progress lead to moral progress?

“By making good and evil understandable, for then
humans can choose between the two. The development
of free will follows the development of intelligence and
increases the responsibility of humans for their acts.”

– Then how can one explain that the most enlightened cultures
are often the most perverted?

“Complete progress is the goal, but like individuals,
cultures only reach it step by step. Until they have
developed the moral sense, they may use their intelligence
to do evil. Morality and intelligence are two forces that
only achieve balance over time.” (See nos. 365-751)

Question 781:
Is humankind ever permitted to halt the march of progress?

Answer:
“No, but it can sometimes slow it down.”

– What are we to think of those who attempt to halt the
march of progress and cause humankind to regress?

“They are poor conceited beings whom God will chastise, and
they will be swept away by the torrent they meant to stop.”

Since progress is a condition of human nature, no one has the
power to oppose it. It is a living force that flawed human laws may
hinder but not stifle. When these laws become incompatible with
progress, it overthrows them along with all the persons who attempt
to uphold them. This will continue to be the case until humans
harmonize their laws with divine justice. Divine justice desires the
good for all, unlike those laws that are made for the strong at the
expense of the weak.

Question 782:
Aren’t there those who obstruct progress out of good faith,
believing they are helping it because from their own point of
view they often see progress where it does not in fact exist?

Answer:
“They are like a tiny pebble under the wheel of a large
cart; a tiny pebble cannot keep a large cart from moving.”

Question 783:
Does the perfecting of humankind always follow a slow
progressive march?

Answer:
“There is the regular slow progress that results from the
force of things. However, when a culture does not advance
quickly enough, then from time to time, God causes a
physical or moral jolt that transforms it.”

Humans cannot remain forever in ignorance since they must reach
the goal set by Providence. They are enlightened by the force of
circumstances. Moral revolutions, like social revolutions, creep
into people’s ideas little by little. They germinate for centuries and
suddenly burst forth, overthrowing the crumbling edifice of the past,
which is no longer in accord with new needs and new aspirations.

In such upheavals, people usually do not perceive more than the
momentary disorder and confusion that affect their own material
interests. Nevertheless, those who raise their thought beyond
themselves admire the designs of Providence, which bring good out
of bad. Such upheavals are like the storms and disturbances that
leave the atmosphere cleansed after having disrupted it.

Question 784:
Humankind’s perversity is very great. Doesn’t it seem like
humans are regressing instead of progressing, at least from a
moral point of view?

Answer:
“You are mistaken. Observe the whole closely and you
will see that they are advancing because they have a better
understanding of what evil is, leading them day by day
to reform their abuses. The excess of evil will make them
understand the need for the good and for reforms.”

Question 785:
What is the greatest obstacle to progress?

Answer:
“Pride and selfishness. I am referring to moral progress,
since intellectual progress is always occurring. Progress
itself seems at first glance to double the intensity of these
two vices by developing ambition and the love of wealth,
but this in turn incites persons to pursue research that
enlightens their spirits. It is thus that everything is related
in the moral world as well as in the physical, and that
good is brought out of evil itself. But this state of things
will only last for a while. It will change as people better
understand that beyond the enjoyment of earthly wealth
there is an infinitely greater and long-lasting bliss.” (See
Selfishness, chap. XII.)

There are two kinds of progress that mutually support each other,
but which do not proceed in tandem: intellectual progress and
moral progress. Throughout this century, intellectual progress
among civilized cultures has received all the stimuli it could desire
and has reached an unprecedented level. Moral progress has also
occurred, although not at the same rate. If we compare the social
customs of a few centuries ago with those of today, we would have
to be blind to deny that there has been progress. Then why should
the ascendant march of morality be interrupted any more than
that of intelligence? Why should there not be as great a difference
in morality between the nineteenth and twenty-fourth centuries
as there has been between the morality of the fourteenth and
nineteenth? To doubt this would be to assume that humanity has
reached the apogee of perfection – which is absurd – or that it is
not morally perfectible – which has been disproved by experience.