Animals and Human Beings

Question 592:
If we compare human beings with animals in relation
to intelligence, it seems difficult to establish a line of
demarcation, because certain animals on this earth have an
obvious superiority over certain humans. Can such a line of
demarcation be established in any precise manner?

Answer:
“Your philosophers are not in much agreement about
this subject. Some would want for humans to be animals,
and others for animals to be human. Both are wrong.
Humans are beings apart, who sometimes sink very
low, or who may sometimes ascend very high. In their

physical nature, humans are like the animals and less
well-endowed than many of them. Nature has given the
animals everything that humans are obligated to invent
with their intelligence in order to provide for their own
needs and self-preservation. Their body is destroyed like
that of the animals  – that is certain  – but their spirit
has a destiny that they alone can comprehend because
they alone are completely free. Poor humans, who debase
yourselves more than wild animals! Don’t you know how
to distinguish yourselves from them? Recognize human
beings through their ability to think about God.”

Question 593:
Could we say that animals act only through instinct?

Answer:
“That again is a theory. It is quite true that instinct
dominates most animals, but don’t you see some that act
from a determined will? It is because they have limited
intelligence.”

One could not deny to certain animals the practice of complex
actions that denote the will to act in a determined sense beyond
instinct and according to circumstances. Therefore, there is in them
a kind of intelligence, but in exercising it they are concentrating it
more on the means of satisfying their physical needs and providing
for their self-preservation. Among them there is no creation, no
improvement. Whatever may be the skill that we admire in their
labors, that which they did yesterday is the same as what they
do today, neither better nor worse, according to constant and
unvarying forms and proportions. Offspring separated from their
species do not fail to build their nest in accordance with the same
model without having been taught. If some animals are capable of a
certain amount of learning, such intellectual development is always
restricted within narrow limits and is due to human action on a
flexible nature. They cannot make any progress by themselves, and
when they do make progress, it is ephemeral and purely individual,
because if abandoned to themselves, they quickly return to the
limits traced out for them by nature.

Question 594:
Do animals have language?

Answer:
“If you mean a language formed of words and syllables,
no, but if you mean a way of communicating amongst
themselves, then yes. They say many more things than
you might suppose, but their language is limited to their
needs, as are their thoughts.”

– There are animals that possess no voice. Aren’t they deprived
of language?

“They understand one another by other means. Don’t you
human beings use more than speech to communicate with
one another? And mutes, what about them? Since animals
are endowed with a life of relationships, they have means
of warning each other and of expressing the sensations they
experience. Do you think that fish do not understand each
other? Human beings do not have the exclusive privilege
of language, but the language of animals is instinctive and
limited exclusively to the circle of their own needs and
thoughts, while that of humans is perfectible and lends
itself to all the conceptions of their intelligence.”

Actually, fish, like swallows, which migrate en masse obeying the
lead, must have means of warning and understanding one another
and grouping together. Perhaps they do so amongst themselves, or
perhaps the water is a vehicle that transmits certain vibrations to
them. Whatever the case may be, it is undeniable that they have the
means available to understand one another, in the same way as all
animals deprived of voice perform activities in common. In light of
this, must one wonder at spirits’ being able to communicate with
one another without recourse to articulated speech? (See no. 282)

Question 595:
Do animals have free will?

Answer:
“They are not simple machines as you might suppose,
but their freedom of action is limited to their needs and
cannot be compared to human freedom. Since they are far

less evolved than human beings, they do not have the same
duties. Their freedom is restricted to the actions of their
material life.”

Question 596:
Where do certain animals get their aptitude to imitate human
language, and why is this aptitude found more among birds
than among apes, for example, whose body structure is more
analogous to the human structure?

Answer:
“The particular conformation of the vocal organs, aided
by the instinct of imitation. Apes imitate gestures; certain
birds imitate the voice.”

Question 597:
Since animals have an intelligence that gives them a certain
freedom of action, is there in them a principle independent of
matter?

Answer:
“Yes, and it survives their body.”

– Is this principle a soul similar to that of humans?

“It is a soul, if you’d like; it depends on the meaning you
attach to the word. It is much less evolved than that of
humans, however. Between the souls of animals and
humans there is as great a difference as there is between
the human soul and God.”

Question 598:
Does the animal’s soul retain its individuality and selfawareness after death?

Answer:
“Its individuality, yes, but not its self-awareness. Its
intelligent life remains in a latent state.”

Question 599:
Can an animal soul choose the species in which it prefers to
incarnate?

Answer:
“No. It does not possess free will.”

Question 600:
Since the animal’s soul survives its body, does it remain in an
errant state like the human soul after death?

“It remains in a type of errant state because it is not
united to a body, but it is not an errant spirit. The
errant spirit is a being who thinks and acts of its own
free will. Animal spirits do not have the same faculty.
Self-awareness is what comprises the principal attribute
of the human spirit. After its death, an animal’s soul is
classified by the spirits in charge of doing so and it is
utilized almost immediately. It is not given time to enter
into relations with other creatures.”

Question 601:
Do animals follow a law of progress like humans?

Answer:
“Yes, and that is why on higher worlds, where humans
are more advanced, the animals are also more advanced
and possess more developed means of communication.
However, they are always lower than humans and subject
to them – they are their intelligent servants.”

There is nothing extraordinary about this. Let us imagine that our
more intelligent animals, such as the dog, the elephant and the
horse were endowed with a physical conformation appropriate for
manual labor. What mightn’t they do under human direction?

Question 602:
Do animals progress by their will, like human beings, or by
necessity?

Answer:
“By necessity. That is why there is no expiation for them.”

Question 603:
On highly evolved worlds, do the animals know about God?

Answer:
“No. Human beings are gods to them, as spirits use to be
gods to humans.”

Question 604:
Since the animals  – even the perfected ones of the higher
worlds – are always beneath humans, wouldn’t this result in
God having created intelligent beings perpetually condemned
to inferiority? If so, wouldn’t this seem to be in disagreement
with the unity of design and progress discernible in all of God’s works?

“Everything in nature is linked together by ties that you
cannot yet perceive, and the most apparently discrepant
things have points of contact that humans will never
manage to comprehend in their present state. They may
glimpse them through an effort of their intelligence, but it is
only when that intelligence has reached its full development
and frees itself from the prejudices of pride and ignorance
that they will be able to see clearly into the works of God.
Until then, their limited ideas will cause them to look at
everything from a petty and limited point of view. Rest
assured that God cannot be self-contradictory and that
everything in nature is harmonized through general laws
that never deviate from the sublime wisdom of the Creator.”

– Then intelligence is a common property, a point of contact
between the souls of animals and humans?

“Yes, but animals only have the intelligence of material
life; in humans, intelligence produces moral life.”

Question 605:
If we considered all the points of contact between humans and
animals, mightn’t we believe that humans possess two souls: an
animal soul and a spiritual soul, and that if they did not have
the latter, they would live only as animals? In other words,
isn’t the animal a being similar to the human, minus the
spiritual soul? If so, wouldn’t it follow that the good and evil
instincts of humans would be the effect of the predominance
of one or other of these two souls?

Answer:
“No, humans do not have two souls, but the body has its
instincts, which result from the sensations of its organs.
There is nothing in humans except a dual nature: the
animal nature and the spiritual nature. Through their
body and instincts, they participate in the nature and
instincts of animals. Through their soul, they participate
in the nature of spirits.”

– Thus, besides getting rid of its own imperfections, must the
spirit also struggle against the influence of matter?

“Yes, the less evolved it is, the tighter are the bonds between
the spirit and matter. Can’t you see that? No, humans do
not have two souls; the soul is always one in each individual.
The soul of animals and that of humans are so very different
from each other that the soul of one cannot animate the
body created for the other. But if humans do not possess an
animal soul, whose passions would place it on the level of
the animals, they nonetheless have an animal body, which
often drags them down to that level  – a body endowed
with vitality, but unintelligent and possessed of the limited
instincts required for its self-preservation.”

When a spirit incarnates into a human body, it transmits to it the
intellectual and moral principle that places it on a higher order than
the animals. The two natures in humans give two distinct sources
to their passions: some spring from the instincts of nature; others,
from the impurities of the incarnate spirit, which sympathizes to a
greater or lesser degree with the baseness of the animal appetites. In
purifying itself, a spirit frees itself from the influence of matter little
by little. Under such influence, it approaches the animals; freed
from such influence, it rises toward its true destiny.

Question 606:
Where do the animals get the intelligent principle that comprises
the particular kind of soul with which they are endowed?

Answer:
“From the universal intelligent element.”

– Then the intelligence of both humans and animals emanates
from a single principle?

“Of course, but in humans it goes through a development
that elevates it above that of the animals.”

Question 607:
It has been stated that the human soul at its origin resembles
the state of human infancy in the corporeal life, that its
intelligence is only beginning to unfold, and that it is preparing
itself for life (see no. 190). Where does the soul accomplish this
primary phase?

Answer:
“In a series of existences preceding the period you call
humanity.”

– Then it would seem that the soul had been the intelligent
principle of the lower beings of creation; correct?

“Haven’t we stated that everything in nature is linked
together and tends toward unity? It is in those beings, whom
you are far from knowing about entirely, that the intelligent
principle is developed, is gradually individualized and is
prepared for life, as we have stated. In a certain way, it is
a preparatory work like that of germination, after which
the intelligent principle undergoes a transformation and
becomes a spirit. It is then that the period of humanity
begins for it, and with it the consciousness of its future, the
distinction between good and evil and the responsibility
for its acts – the same way that childhood comes before
adolescence, then youth and finally adulthood. There is
nothing humiliating about this origin. Do the greatest
geniuses feel humiliated at having been shapeless fetuses in
the maternal womb? If anything ought to humiliate them,
it is their low status before God and their powerlessness
to probe the depths of the divine designs and the wisdom
of the laws regulating the harmony of the universe. Strive
to realize the greatness of God in the admirable harmony
that establishes the solidarity of all things in nature. To
believe that God could have made anything without a
purpose, and have created intelligent beings without a
future, would be to blaspheme God’s goodness, which
extends over all creatures.”

– Does this period of humanity begin on our earth?

“The earth is not the starting point of a human’s first
incarnation. The period of humanness usually begins on
worlds even less evolved. This, however, is not an absolute
rule and it may happen that a spirit at its human beginning
may be suited to live on the earth. Such a case is not frequent
and would be an exception rather than a rule.”

Question 608:
After death, does a human spirit have any awareness of the
existences that preceded its period of humanness?

Answer:
“No, because it is only after that period that its life as a spirit
began. It even has difficulty in remembering its first existences
as a human, exactly as humans no longer remember the
earliest days of their childhood, and still less the time they
spent in the maternal womb. That is why spirits tell you that
they do not know how they began.” (See no. 78)

Question 609:
Having entered the period of humanness, does a spirit retain
traces of what it had previously been; that is, of the state in which
it found itself in the period that could be called non-human?

Answer:
“That depends on the distance separating the two periods
and the progress it has accomplished. For a few generations
it may preserve a more or less pronounced reflection of
the primitive state, for nothing in nature occurs through
an abrupt transition. There are always links connecting the
end of the chain of beings or events. However, such traces
disappear with the development of free will. The first steps
of progress are accomplished slowly because they are not yet
aided by the will; but they follow a more rapid progress as
the spirit acquires a more perfect consciousness of itself.”

Question 610:
Then are the spirits who have said that humans are beings
apart in the order of creation mistaken?

“No, but the issue has not been fully developed and there
are things that can only come in their time. Humans are
in fact beings apart, for they have faculties that distinguish
them from all others and they have another destiny.
The human species is the one God has chosen for the
incarnation of the beings who can know God.”