The Formation of Living Beings

Question 43:
When did living beings first appear on the earth?

Creation

“In the beginning, all was chaos; the elements were all
jumbled together. Little by little, each thing settled into
its proper place. Then, living beings appropriate for that
state of the globe appeared.”

Question 44:
Where did these living beings come from in order to appear on
the earth?

Answer:
“The earth already contained their prototypes, which
had been waiting for the favorable moment in order
to develop. The organic elements began to combine
the moment the force that had kept them apart ceased,
thereby forming the prototypes of all living beings.
These prototypes then remained latent and inert – like
a chrysalis or a seed – until the proper time for each
species to appear. Then, the beings of each species came
together and reproduced.”

Question 45:
Where were these organic elements before earth’s formation?

Answer:
“They were in a fluidic state (so to speak) in space amongst
the spirits or on other planets, waiting for the creation of
the earth in order to commence a new existence on that
new globe.”

Chemistry shows us that when the proper conditions are present,
the molecules of inorganic bodies unite to form crystals of a
consistent regularity according to each type. However, the slightest
shift in such conditions is enough to prevent the combining of
the elements, or at least the orderly arrangement that comprises
the crystal. Why would the same not apply to organic elements?
We can store the seeds of plants and animals for many years but
they do not develop unless given the appropriate temperature
and environment. We have seen grains of wheat germinate after
several centuries. Thus, there is a latent life principle in these
seeds that merely waits for favorable circumstances in order to
develop. Could this everyday occurrence not have existed since
the globe’s origin? Is God’s glory diminished by the fact that

living beings were formed out of chaos by the forces of nature?
Far from it. Instead, this fact corresponds better to the idea that
God wields divine power over all the infinite worlds by using
eternal laws. Granted, this theory does not solve the problem of
how the life elements themselves originated, but God guards the
divine secrets and has put limits on our inquiries.

Question 46:
Are there still creatures that come into being spontaneously?

Answer:
“Yes, but their primitive prototype has always existed in
the latent state. You witness this phenomenon all the time.
Don’t human and animal tissues contain a multitude of
larval prototypes waiting to emerge as soon as the decay
needed for their existence begins? It is a microscopic world
that slumbers and then awakens.”

Question 47:
Was the human species among the organic elements on the
terrestrial globe?

Answer:
“Yes, and it came forth at just the right time. This is the
basis for the statement that humans were formed from the
dust of the earth.”

Question 48:
Can we know the ages in which humans and other life forms
first appeared on the earth?

Answer:
“No, all of your calculations are purely speculative.”

Question 49:
If the prototype of the human species was among the globe’s
organic elements, why don’t human beings continue to appear
spontaneously, as they did when they first came into being?

Answer:
“The beginning of things remains one of God’s secrets.
Nevertheless, we can say that once early humans
began to spread out over the earth, they absorbed into
themselves the elements needed for their formation in
order to pass on these elements according to the laws
of reproduction. The same happened with all the other
species of living beings.”

Creation