Relapsed Cultures

Question 786:
History has shown us many cultures that relapsed into
barbarity after shocking events deeply upset them. Where is
the progress in such a case?

Answer:
“When your house threatens to collapse, you demolish it
in order to build a stronger and more comfortable one.
Until it is rebuilt, however, there is trouble and confusion
in your dwelling.

“A further example: you are poor and live in a hovel, but
you become wealthy and leave it to live in a palace. Then,
some poor fellow (as you formerly were) comes and takes
your place in the hovel and feels very content because he

previously had no shelter at all. Very well! Learn from this
that the spirits incarnated in those declining cultures are
no longer the spirits who had comprised them during
their time of splendor. Because they have progressed,
those former spirits have moved into even more perfect
dwellings, while less advanced ones have taken their place,
which they too will leave behind in their turn.”

Question 787:
Aren’t there peoples that by their very nature rebel against
progress?

Answer:
“Yes, but they are corporeally disappearing day by day.”

– What will be the future fate of the souls who animate those
peoples?

“Like all other souls, they will finally arrive at perfection
by passing through many, many existences. God deserts
no one.”

– So the most civilized individuals may have been primitive
beings and cannibals?

“You yourselves were such more than once before becoming
what you are now.”

Question 788:
Like individuals, cultures are collective individualities that
pass through childhood, adulthood and decrepitude. Since
this truth is attested to by history, doesn’t it lead us to assume
that the most advanced cultures of this century will decline
and end just as those of antiquity?

Answer:
“Those cultures that only live a material existence, and
whose greatness is founded only upon power and territorial
expansion, are born, grow and die out because the might
of a culture exhausts itself just like that of an individual.
Cultures with selfish laws that clash with the progress of
enlightenment and charity die out because light annihilates
darkness and charity eradicates selfishness. However, for
cultures, as for individuals, there is the life of the soul, and
cultures with laws that are in harmony with the eternal
laws of the Creator will live and will be guiding lights for
other cultures.”

Question 789:
Will progress someday unite all of earth’s peoples into a single
nation?

Answer:
“Not into a single nation. That would be impossible
because nationalities are formed based on different customs
and needs arising from the diversity in climates, and their
local laws are designed to accommodate such customs
and needs. Charity, on the other hand, knows nothing of
geographical latitudes and does not differentiate people
by their color. When the law of God comprises the basis
of human law everywhere, both cultures and individuals
will practice the law of charity toward each other, living
joyfully and peacefully because no one will attempt to
deceive their neighbor or live at his or her expense.”

Humankind progresses by means of individuals who increasingly
improve and enlighten themselves. When these grow in number,
they take the lead and draw the rest forward. Geniuses appear from
time to time to provide an impulse, followed by individuals invested
with authority, who, as instruments of God, enable humankind to
advance many centuries in just a few years.

The progress of cultures further highlights the justice of
reincarnation. Moral individuals make praiseworthy efforts to
help a nation advance morally and intellectually; the nation thus
transformed will be happier both in this world and in the next.
Nonetheless, during the slow march across the centuries, thousands
of people die every day. What will be the fate of those who succumb
along the way? Does their relative state of imperfection deprive
them of the contentedness reserved for those who arrive last? Or is
their happiness relative? Divine justice could not consecrate such an

injustice. Through the plurality of existences, the right to happiness
is always the same for all, for no one is deprived of progress. Those
who live at a time of barbarity can return at a time of civility in the
same culture or in another one. It is obvious that all are benefited
by the ascendant march.

The theory of one sole existence, however, presents another
problem in this case. According to this theory, the soul is created at
the moment of birth; thus, if some individuals are more advanced
than others, it is because God has created a more advanced soul
for them. Why this favoritism? Why would these individuals, who
have not lived any longer than the ones before them – often not
as long – deserve to be given a more advanced soul? But even this
is not the main problem. Over a thousand years, a culture passes
from barbarity to civility. If human beings were able to live a
thousand years, one could conceive that they would have time to
progress during that time. But every day humans die at all ages.
Their numbers are constantly being replenished, with new ones
appearing and disappearing every day to such an extent that by the
end of a millennium, no trace remains of the former inhabitants;
the barbaric nation has become civilized. What is it that has actually
progressed? The individuals who used to be barbarians? But they
already died long ago. Is it the newly-arrived? Well, if their souls
were created at the time of birth, they could not have existed during
the time of barbarity. Thus, we would have to believe that the efforts
made to civilize a people do not have the power to improve imperfect
souls, but to cause God to create other souls who are more advanced.

Let us compare this theory of progress with the one that has been
given to us by the Spirits. The souls that come during the time of
civility have had their infancy like all the others, but they had already
lived many times before, and they arrive already advanced as the
result of previous progress. They come because they are attracted
to an environment which is sympathetic to them and which suits
their current state. Therefore, the efforts made to civilize a people
do not have the effect of determining the future creation of souls
who are more advanced but of attracting those who have already
progressed, whether they had already lived among that people in
times of barbarity, or whether they have come from somewhere
else. Upon this rests the key to the progress of all humankind.
When all cultures are at the same level of morality, the earth will
house only good spirits living in fraternal unity. The evil spirits,
having been repelled and dislocated, will seek out less evolved
worlds and an environment that suits them until they have made
themselves worthy to come back to our transformed world. The
usual theory, unlike that of reincarnation, has one further effect:
works of social improvement only benefit present and future
generations, but are meaningless for past generations, who were
unfortunate because they arrived too soon and were able to
advance only according to their own efforts and under the burden
of their barbaric acts. According to the Spirits’ doctrine, however,
later progress also profits those generations that are reborn into
better conditions, and they can therefore perfect themselves in an
environment of civility. (See no. 222)