Selfishness

Question 913:
Of all the vices, which may we regard as the root?

Answer:
“We have already told you many times: selfishness. All evil
derives from it. Study all the vices and you will see that
selfishness is at the bottom of them all. As much as you may
struggle against them, you will never uproot them as long
as you have not destroyed their cause. Let all your efforts
tend toward that end, because selfishness is the true scourge
of society. Those in this life who want to approach moral
perfection must uproot from their heart every sentiment of
selfishness, for selfishness is incompatible with justice, love
and charity; it neutralizes all other qualities.”

Question 914:
Since selfishness is based on personal interests, it seems difficult
to entirely uproot it from the human heart. Will we ever be
able to do so?

Answer:
“As humans become enlightened about spiritual things,
they attach less value to material things. Next, it is
necessary to reform the human institutions that entertain
and excite the passions. This depends on education.”

Question 915:
Since selfishness is inherent to the human species, won’t
it always be a permanent obstacle to the reign of absolute
goodness upon the earth?

Answer:
“It is certain that selfishness is your greatest evil, but it is
connected to the unpurified nature of the spirits incarnated
on the earth, and not to the human species per se. Upon
purifying themselves over successive incarnations, spirits
get rid of selfishness just as they get rid of other impurities.
On the earth, aren’t there persons who are divested of
selfishness, and who practice charity? They exist in greater
numbers than you might think, but you know few of
them because virtue does not seek to reveal itself in broad
daylight. If there is one, why wouldn’t there be ten? If there
are ten, why wouldn’t there be a thousand, and so on?”

Question 916:
Far from decreasing, selfishness increases with civilization,
which seems to excite and entertain it. How can the cause
destroy the effect?

Answer:
“The greater the evil, the more heinous it becomes. It has
been necessary for selfishness to produce much evil in order
to make you understand the need to uproot it. When human
beings have been freed from the selfishness that dominates
them, they will live as brothers and sisters. They will not
do evil to one another and will mutually help one another
through the fraternal sentiment of solidarity. The strong will
then be the support and not the oppressor of the weak, and
no longer will anyone lack what is needed because all will
practice the law of justice. This is the kingdom of the good
that the Spirits are in charge of preparing.” (See no. 784)

Question 917:
What is the means for destroying selfishness?

Answer:
“Of all human imperfections, the most difficult to uproot is
selfishness because it is connected to the influence of matter,
from which human beings, still so close to their origin, cannot
free themselves. Everything concurs to sustain its influence:
your laws, your social organizations and your education.
Selfishness will be weakened with the predominance of
the moral life over the material life, and especially with the
understanding that Spiritism gives you concerning your
true future state, which is no longer distorted by allegorical
fictions. When it is well understood and identified with
customs and beliefs, Spiritism will transform habits,
usages and social relations. Selfishness is founded upon
the importance of the personality. When well understood,
I repeat, Spiritism enables you to see things from such an
evolved point of view that the sentiment of the personality
somehow disappears before the Doctrine’s immensity. Upon
destroying this self-importance and showing its real nature,
Spiritism necessarily combats selfishness.

“It is the shock that humans experience from the
selfishness of others that usually makes them selfish in
turn because they feel the need to put themselves on the
defensive. Seeing that others think only of themselves and
not of them, they are in turn led to be concerned about
themselves more than about others. Let the principle of
charity and fraternity be the basis of social institutions and
the legal relations between nations and individuals, and
all will think less of themselves when they see that others
are doing so too; thus, they will undergo the moralizing
influence of example and contact. In the light of the
present overflowing of selfishness, true virtue is needed to
sacrifice one’s own personality for the sake of others, who
generally do not recognize it. It is to those, above all, who
possess this virtue that the Kingdom of Heaven is opened.
For them, especially, is reserved the bliss of the elect,
because I can truly tell you that on the day of judgment,
those who have only thought of themselves will be cast
aside and will suffer abandonment.” (See no. 785)

Fenelon

Laudable efforts have doubtlessly been made to help humankind
advance. Good sentiments are encouraged, stimulated and
honored today more than at any other time, and yet the
devouring worm of selfishness continues to be the scourge of
society. It is a true evil that is scattered throughout the world
and of which everyone is more or less a victim. Therefore, it is
necessary to fight it as if we were fighting an epidemic. To this
end we must proceed as physicians do: go back to the cause. Let
us seek out in every structure of the social organization – from
the family to nations, from the hovel to the palace  – all the
causes, all the patent or hidden influences that excite, maintain
and develop the sentiment of selfishness. Once the causes are
known, the remedy will present itself. We will only need to
fight them, if not completely, then at least partly, and little by
little the poison will be drawn out. The cure may take a long
time because the causes are numerous, but it is not impossible.
Moreover, we cannot reach that point unless we attack the evil
at its roots; that is, through education. Not the education that
aims only to educate people, however; rather, the education that
also aims to make them moral individuals. When it is rightly
understood, education will be the key to moral progress. When
the art of managing characters is understood as well as the art of
managing intelligences, we will be able to correct characters in
the same way that we straighten new plants. However, this art
requires much tact, much experience and profound observation.
It is a serious error to believe that it is enough to simply have
knowledge in order to apply it advantageously. Whoever has
observed the children of the wealthy as well as of the poor from
the moment of their birth, noticing all the harmful influences
that act on them as a result of the weakness, ignorance and
negligence of those who guide them, and also noticing how
often the means employed to moralize them usually fail, will not
be surprised to find so much confusion in the world. Let efforts
be made toward morality as much as toward intelligence and
we will see that if there are obstinate natures, there are also, in
a greater number than you might think, those who require only
good cultivation in order to yield good fruit. (See no. 872)

People want to be content, and this sentiment is in their very
nature. That is why they work without ceasing to improve
their situation on earth, and to seek out the causes of their
ills in order to cure them. When they rightly understand that
selfishness is one of those causes; that it engenders the pride,
ambition, cupidity, envy, hatred and jealousy of which they
are at every moment the victim; that it brings trouble into
all social relations, provokes dissension and destroys trust,
obligating them to constantly maintain a defensive attitude
towards their neighbor; that it engenders a sentiment that
converts friend into foe, then they will also understand that
this vice is incompatible with their own happiness. We would
add that it is incompatible with their own safety as well. Thus,
the more they suffer as a result of it, the more they will feel the
need to fight it as they would a plague, harmful animals and
all other scourges. They will be compelled to do so out of their
own self-interest. (See no. 784)

Selfishness is the source of all vices, as charity is the source of all
virtues. Destroying the former and developing the latter should be
the aim of all people’s efforts if they wish to ensure their happiness
in this world as well as in the future.