Guardian Angels: Protector, Familiar and Sympathetic Spirits

Question 489:
Are there spirits who link themselves to particular individuals
in order to protect them?

Answer:
“Yes, spirit friends; what you call good spirits or guardian
spirits.”

Question 490:
What is a guardian angel?

Answer:
“A protector spirit of a high order.”

Question 491:
What is the mission of protector spirits?

“Their mission is that of parents toward their children:
to guide their wards along the path of the good, to
help them with their counsels, to console them in their
afflictions and to sustain their courage in the trials of
earthly life.”

Question 492:
Are protector spirits connected to particular individuals
from birth?

Answer:
“From birth to death. They frequently accompany them
after death in the spirit life and even through numerous
corporeal existences, because these existences are no more
than very short phases in the life of a spirit.”

Question 493:
Is the mission of a protector spirit voluntary or obligatory?

Answer:
“The spirit is obliged to watch over you because it has
accepted the task; however, it is allowed to choose beings
who are attuned to it. For some, it is a pleasure; for others,
a mission or a duty.”

– In linking itself to an individual, does the spirit refrain
from protecting other individuals?

“No, but it does so less exclusively.”

Question 494:
Is the protector spirit indissolubly connected to the person who
has been entrusted into its care?

Answer:
“Certain spirits often leave their position to carry out
different assignments, but in such cases they are replaced.”

Question 495:
Do protector spirits sometimes abandon their ward when the
latter is heedless of their warnings?

Answer:
“They withdraw when they see that their counsels are
useless, and that the ward’s will is set on submitting to the
influence of little-evolved spirits. They do not abandon
them entirely, however, and always try to make themselves
heard. Their wards are the ones who shut their ears. Their
protectors return as soon as they are called.

“If there is a doctrine that should convert the most
incredulous by its charm and sweetness, it is that of
guardian angels. Isn’t it a very consoling idea to know that
you always have at your side beings who are more evolved
than you, who are always there to counsel, sustain and aid
you in scaling the rugged mountain of the good, who are
more reliable and devoted friends than the most intimate
connections that may be contracted on earth? These beings
are there at God’s orders. It was God who has placed them
at your side; they are there out of love for God and they
fulfill a beautiful but laborious mission alongside you.
Wherever you may be, your angel will be there with you:
in prison, in the hospital, in dens of iniquity, in solitude;
nothing separates you from that friend whom you cannot
see, but from whom your soul nonetheless receives the
gentlest impulses and hears the wisest counsels.

“Why can’t you understand this truth more fully! How many
times it would help you in moments of crisis; how many
times it would save you from evil spirits! But on the great
day of accounting, this angel of the good might have to say
to you, ‘Didn’t I offer you advice? Yet, you did not follow
it! Didn’t I show you the abyss? Yet, you fell into it! Didn’t
I make the voice of truth resound in your conscience, yet
you followed the counsels of a lie instead?’ Question your
guardian angels. Establish between yourselves and them
that intimate tenderness that reigns between best friends.
Do not think of hiding anything from them, for they are
the eyes of God and you cannot deceive them. Consider
the future. Seek to progress in this life, and your trials will
be shorter and your lives happier. Come; take heart! Once
and for all, avoid prejudices and ulterior motives! Enter
upon the new pathway now opening before you! Forward,
forward! You have guides; follow them. Your goal cannot
fail you, for the goal is God.

“To those who think it impossible that truly high order
spirits could devote themselves to such a laborious task
and at all instants, we will say that we can indeed influence
your souls, even though millions of miles may separate
us. Space does not exist to us, and even while living on
another world, our spirits retain a connection with you.
We enjoy faculties that you cannot comprehend; however,
you can be certain that God has not imposed a task on
us that is above our strength, or that God has abandoned
you alone on the earth without friends or support. All
guardian angels have their wards, whom they watch over
as parents watch over their children. They feel happy when
they see them on the path of the good but mourn when
their counsels are despised.

“Do not fear tiring us with your questions; rather, remain
in contact with us always: you will thus be stronger and
happier. These communications between each indivi­dual
and his or her familiar spirit are what make all individuals
mediums – mediums ignored today but who will show
themselves later, spreading out like an ocean without
shores to sweep away disbelief and ignorance. People of
learning, teach; people of talent, educate your brothers
and sisters! Without knowing it, the work you accomplish
is Christ’s work, which God has imposed on you. Why
has God granted you intelligence and knowledge if not to
share them with your brothers and sisters to enable them
to progress on the path of joy and eternal blessedness?”

St. Louis, St. Augustine

The doctrine of guardian angels watching over their wards, in spite
of the distance separating the worlds, has nothing surprising about
it; on the contrary, it is grand and sublime. On the earth, do we not
often see a father, albeit far away, watch over his child and aid him
or her with his wise counsels through correspondence? Why should
we wonder that there are spirits who, from one world to the other,
are able to guide those whom they have taken under their protection,
since to them the distance separating the two worlds is less than that
separating the continents on the earth? Do they not have the universal
fluid that connects all worlds, uniting them in solidarity with one
another, an immense vehicle for the transmission of thought, as the
air is for us the vehicle for the transmission of sound?

Question 496:
Can spirits who abandon their wards and no longer do them
good do them evil instead?

Answer:
“Good spirits never do evil. They leave that to those
who take their place, and then you blame fate for the
misfortunes that overwhelm you, whereas you yourselves
are actually to blame.”

Question 497:
Can protector spirits leave their wards at the mercy of spirits
who might harm them?

Answer:
“There is unity among evil spirits for neutralizing the
action of the good ones, but if wards would so desire, they
could restore the link to their good spirit. The good spirit
may find a more willing person somewhere else to help in
the meantime while awaiting its ward to return.”

Question 498:
When protector spirits allow their wards to be led astray in life,
is it because they are powerless to confront malevolent spirits?

Answer:
“It is not because they are powerless, but because they do not
want to. Their wards emerge from their trials more evolved
and more learned. Their protector spirits assist them with
their counsels through the good thoughts they suggest but
which, unfortunately, are not always heeded. It is nothing

The Intervention of Spirits in the Corporeal World

but human weakness, carelessness or pride that grants power
to evil spirits. Their power over you comes solely from the
fact that you do not offer them any resistance.”

Question 499:
Are protector spirits with their wards all the time? Aren’t
there circumstances where they may lose sight of them without
abandoning them?

Answer:
“There are circumstances in which the presence of the
protector spirit next to its ward is not necessary.”

Question 500:
Does a time come in which a spirit no longer needs its
guardian angel?

Answer:
“Yes, when it reaches the level at which it can guide itself,
just as the time comes in which the student no longer
needs the master. But this does not happen on the earth.”

Question 501:
Why is the action of spirits in our lives so secretive? When they
are protecting us, why don’t they do so openly?

Answer:
“If you counted on their support all the time, you would
not act by yourselves and your spirit would not progress.
In order for it to advance, it needs experience and it
must be acquired at its own expense. It must exert its
own volition; otherwise, it would be like an infant who
is not allowed to walk by itself. The action of the spirits
who wish you well always occurs in such a way so as not
to hamper your free will, for if you did not have any
responsibility, you would not progress on the path that
must lead you toward God. Since they do not see who
is helping them, humans rely on their own efforts. Their
guides watch over them nevertheless and from time to
time warn them of danger.”

Question 502:
Do the protector spirits who succeed in leading their ward
along the path of the good experience any good for themselves?

Answer:
“It is a merit that will be taken into account, whether for
their advancement or their happiness. They feel happy
when they see their efforts crowned with success. It is a
triumph for them, as when a mentor exults at the success
of his or her disciple.”

– Are they responsible if their efforts are unsuccessful?

“No, because they have done all they could.”

Question 503:
Don’t protector spirits suffer when they see their wards
following an immoral path in spite of their warning, and
isn’t it a cause of distress for them?

Answer:
“They suffer from their wards’ misdeeds and they pity
them, but this affliction has none of the anguish of earthly
parenthood, because they know that there is a remedy for the
evil and that what is not done today will be done tomorrow.”

Question 504:
Could we ever know the name of our protector spirit or
guardian angel?

Answer:
“Why do you want to know names that do not exist for
you? Do you believe there are only spirits with whom you
are familiar?”

– But how can we invoke it if we do not know its name?

“Give it any name you please: that of a high order spirit for
whom you have sympathy or veneration. Your protector
will answer to that name, for all good spirits are kin and
mutually assist each other.”

Question 505:
Are protector spirits who employ well-known names always
those of the actual individuals who had those names?

Answer:
“No, but they are spirits who are sympathetic to them,
and who often come at their orders. You require a name;
therefore, they employ one that will inspire your trust.

When you cannot personally carry out a mission, you send
someone whom you trust and who acts in your name.”

Question 506:
When we return to the spirit life, will we recognize our
protector spirit?

Answer:
“Yes, because you frequently knew it before your
incarnation.”

Question 507:
Do protector spirits all belong to the order of highly evolved
spirits? Can they sometimes be found among average orders? Can
a father, for example, become the protector spirit of his child?

Answer:
“He can, but protection presupposes a certain degree of
elevation, and additionally, a power or virtue granted
by God. A father who protects his child may himself be
assisted by a more evolved spirit.”

Question 508:
Can spirits who have left the earth under good circumstances always
protect those whom they loved and who have survived them?

Answer:
“Their power is more or less restricted. The position in
which they find themselves does not always allow them
full freedom of action.”

Question 509:
Do humans in the primitive state or in the state of moral
impurity also have protector spirits? If so, are these spirits of
an order as elevated as those of more advanced humans?

Answer:
“All individuals have a spirit who watches over them,
but such a mission is relative to its purpose. You do
not give a professor of philosophy to a child who is
just learning to read. The progress of the familiar spirit
follows that of the spirit it protects. Having a highly
evolved spirit who watches over you, you in turn may
become the protector of a spirit who is less evolved than
you, and the progress you help that spirit make will
contribute to your own advancement. God does not
require of a spirit more than what its nature and the
degree at which it has arrived will allow.”

Question 510:
When a father who has been watching over his child
reincarnates, does he still continue to do so?

Answer:
“That is a more difficult situation, but in a moment of
freedom he may ask that a sympathetic spirit assist him
in this mission. However, spirits only accept missions that
they can carry out to the end.

“Incarnate spirits, especially on worlds where existence is
quite material, are too dominated by their physical body
to be able to devote themselves entirely to others; that is,
to assist them personally. That is why those who are not
sufficiently evolved are themselves assisted by spirits who
are more evolved, so that if one fails, for whatever reason,
it will be replaced by another.”

Question 511:
Besides our protector spirit, is an evil spirit connected to
each one of us for the purpose of leading us into evil and for
providing us an opportunity to struggle with good and evil?

Answer:
“Connected is not the right term. It is certainly true that evil
spirits try to draw individuals away from the moral road
when they find the opportunity. However, when one of
them connects itself to an individual, it does so of its own
accord because it hopes to be listened to. This gives rise to
a struggle between the good and the evil spirit, and the one
whose influence the individual has heeded will win.”

Question 512:
May we have several protector spirits?

Answer:
“All individuals always have sympathetic spirits who are
more advanced or less so, who dedicate their affection
to them and who take an interest in them; there are also
those who help them in evil.”

Question 513:
Do sympathetic spirits act in virtue of a mission?

Answer:
“Sometimes they may have a temporary mission, but
generally they are only attracted due to a similarity of
thought and sentiment in good or evil.”

– So it is correct to assume that sympathetic spirits may be
either good or evil?

“Yes, humans will always encounter spirits who sympathize
with them, whatever their character may be.”

Question 514:
Are familiar spirits the same as sympathetic spirits or protector
spirits?

Answer:
“There are many, many gradations of protection and
sympathy. Give to them whatever names you desire. The
familiar spirit, however, is usually a friend of the home.”

From the above explanations and from observations made about the
nature of spirits who connect themselves to human beings, we may
deduce the following:

Protector spirits, guardian angels or good spirits are those whose
mission is to follow humans during life and to help them progress.
They are always more highly evolved than their ward.

Familiar spirits link themselves to certain persons by means of ties
of varying duration in order to help them according to their power,
which is frequently quite limited, however. These are good spirits, but
sometimes little-advanced and even a little frivolous. They voluntarily
occupy themselves with the details of an individual’s personal life, and
only act by order or with permission of protector spirits.

Sympathetic spirits are those whom we attract to us through
individual affections and a certain similarity in tastes and sentiments,
both in good and in evil. The duration of their relationship almost
always depends on the circumstances.

Evil spirits are imperfect or wicked spirits who attach themselves to
individuals for the purpose of diverting them from the good, but
they behave at their own impulse and not in virtue of a mission.
Their tenacity is directly related to how easy or difficult their access
to the person is, and individuals are always free to listen to their
voice or to repel them.

Question 515:
What should be thought of persons who seem to attach
themselves to others in order to lead them inevitably into
perdition, or on the other hand, to guide them along the path
of the good?

Answer:
“Some persons exert a certain effect on others; they hold
a kind of spell over them that seems irresistible. When
this happens for evil, they are in fact evil spirits whom
other evil spirits employ in order to better subjugate their
victims. God may permit this in order to test them.”

Question 516:
Could our good spirit or an evil one incarnate in order to
follow us more directly in life?

Answer:
“This sometimes happens, but they frequently entrust this
task to incarnate spirits who are sympathetic with them.”

Question 517:
Are there spirits who attach themselves to an entire family in
order to protect it?

Answer:
“Some spirits link themselves to the members of the same
family, who live together and are united by affection;
however, do not believe in spirit protectors of race pride.”

Question 518:
Since spirits are attracted to individuals out of sympathy, are they
attracted to groups of individuals for particular reasons as well?

Answer:
“Spirits prefer places where they can be amongst those
who are like themselves. In such places, they can be more
at ease and surer of being listened to. Humans attract
spirits because of their tendencies, whether as individuals,
as a collective group, a city or a nation. Thus, there are
societies, cities and nations that are assisted by spirits
of greater or lesser advancement, depending on their
character and the passions that dominate them. Since
imperfect spirits withdraw from those who repel them, the
moral purity of a collective whole, like that of individuals,
tends to repel evil spirits and attract good ones. The latter
awaken and maintain a sense of the good in the masses,
in the same way that the former may inspire in them the
worst passions.”

Question 519:
Do groups of individuals such as societies, cities and nations
have their own special protector spirits?

Answer:
“Yes, because such groups are collective individualities
that are headed toward a common objective and therefore
have the need of higher direction.”

Question 520:
Are the protector spirits of groups of a more advanced nature
than those who are linked to individuals?

Answer:
“Everything is relative to the degree of advancement,
whether of groups or of individuals.”

Question 521:
May certain spirits help the arts to progress by watching over
those involved in them?

Answer:
“There are special protector spirits who assist those who
invoke them, and whom they deem worthy. But what could
you expect them to do for those who deem themselves to
be something, which, in fact, they are not? They cannot
make the blind see or the deaf hear.”

The ancients made special deities of such spirits. The Muses were
the allegorical personification of the protector spirits of the arts
and sciences, just as the family protector spirits were designated by
the names of lares and penates. Among moderns, the arts and the
various industries, cities and countries also have their own patrons
or protectors, who are high order spirits, but under other names.

Since all individuals have their own sympathetic spirits, it thus
follows that in all collective groups the overall quality of the
sympathetic spirits corresponds to the overall quality of the
individuals composing them, and that foreign spirits are attracted
to such groups out of similarity of tastes and thoughts. In other
words, these groups, as well as the individuals comprising them,
are more favorably surrounded by protector spirits or they are less
surrounded by them, and they are assisted and influenced according
to the nature of the thoughts of the majority.

Among nations, the causes that attract spirits are their customs,
habits, their dominant character, and above all, their laws, for the
character of a nation is reflected in its laws. Humans who ensure
that justice reigns among them combat the influence of evil spirits.
Wherever laws consecrate injustices that are contrary to humanity,
good spirits are in the minority and a mass of evil ones flood in,
keeping the people of that nation stuck in their ideas and paralyzing
the occasional good influences, which become lost in the crowd
like isolated stalks of corn in the midst of weeds. By studying the
customs of nations or of any group of individuals, it is therefore easy
to get an idea of the invisible population that is meddling in their
thoughts and actions.